Tales of Old Japan (1871) is an anthology of short stories compiled by Algernon Bertram Freeman-Mitford, Lord Redesdale, writing under the better known name of A.B. Mitford. These stories focus on various aspects of Japanese life before the Meiji Restoration. The book, which was written in 1871, forms an introduction to Japanese literature and culture, both through the stories, all adapted from Japanese sources, and Mitford's supplementary notes. Also included are Mitford's eyewitness accounts of a selection of Japanese rituals, ranging from harakiri (seppuku) and marriage to a selection of sermons.


== Table of contents ==
The Forty-Seven rônins
The Loves of Gompachi and Komurasaki
Kazuma's Revenge
A Story of the Otokodaté of Yedo
The Wonderful Adventures of Funakoshi Jiuyémon
The Eta Maiden and the Hatamoto
Fairy Tales
The Tongue-cut Sparrow
The Accomplished and Lucky Tea-kettle
The Crackling Mountain
The Story of the Old Man who Made Withered Trees to Blossom
The Battle of the Ape and the Crab
The Adventures of Little Peachling
The Foxes' Wedding
The History of Sakata Kintoki
The Elves and the Envious Neighbour
The Ghost of Sakura
How Tajima Shumé was Tormented by a Devil of His Own Creation
Concerning Certain Superstitions
The Vampire Cat of Nabéshima
The Story of the Faithful Cat
How a Man was Bewitched and Had His Head Shaved by the Foxes
The Grateful Foxes
The Badger's Money
The Prince and the Badger
Japanese Sermons
The Sermons of Kiu-O, Vol. 1. Sermon 1
The Sermons of Kiu-O, Vol. 1. Sermon 2
The Sermons of Kiu-O, Vol. 1. Sermon 3
Appendices
An Account of the Hari-Kiri
The Marriage Ceremony
The Birth and Rearing of Children
Funeral Rites


== References ==

Mitford, A.B. (Algernon Bertram Freeman-Mitford, Lord Redesdale) (1871). Tales of Old Japan. London.
Mitford, Algernon Bertram; Redesdale, Baron (1903). "Tales of Old Japan". Internet Archive. London, England: Macmillan and Co. OCLC 7401358.
Screech, Timon. (2006). Secret Memoirs of the Shoguns: Isaac Titsingh and Japan, 1779–1812. London: RoutledgeCurzon. ISBN 0-7007-1720-X


== External links ==
Tales of Old Japan, scanned books from Project Gutenberg, Internet Archive and Google Books
 Tales of Old Japan public domain audiobook at LibriVox