Chronicles of America is a 50-volume series on American history published by Yale University Press. Fifteen historical films based on the series were also commissioned. Entries in the series were first published in 1918. They were written by historians about various aspects of American history. The series was edited by Allen Johnson and published by Yale University. All 50 volumes are available on archive.org; some are available on Project Gutenberg.
The 50 volumes in the series are as follows:

The Red Man's Continent: A Chronicle of Aboriginal America - Ellsworth Huntington
The Spanish Conquerors: A Chronicle of the Dawn of Empire Overseas - Irving Berdine Richman
Elizabethan Sea-Dogs: A Chronicle of Drake & His Companions - William Charles Henry Wood
Crusaders of New France: A Chronicle of the Fleur-de-Lis in the Wilderness - William Bennett Munro
Pioneers of the Old South: A Chronicle of English Colonial Beginnings - Mary Johnston
The Fathers of New England: A Chronicle of the Puritan Commonwealth - Charles McLean Andrews
Dutch & English on the Hudson: A Chronicle of Colonial New York - Maud Wilder Goodwin
The Quaker Colonies: A Chronicle of the Proprietors of the Delaware - Sydney George Fisher
Colonial Folkways: A Chronicle of American Life in the Reign of the Georges - Charles M. Andrews
The Conquest of New France: A Chronicle of the Colonial Wars - George McKinnon Wrong
The Eve of the Revolution: A Chronicle of the Breach with England - Carl Lotus Becker
Washington & His Comrades in Arms: A Chronicle of the War of Independence - George McKinnon Wrong
The Fathers of the Constitution: A Chronicle of the Establishment of the Union - Max Farrand
Washington  & His Colleagues: A Chronicle of the New Order in Politics - Henry Jones Ford
Jefferson & His Colleagues: A Chronicle of the Virginia Dynasty - Allen Johnson
John Marshall & the Constitution: A Chronicle of the Supreme Court - Edward Samuel Corwin
The Fight for a Free Sea: A Chronicle of the War of 1812 - Ralph Delahaye Paine
Pioneers of the Old Southwest: A Chronicle of the Dark & Bloody Ground - Constance Lindsay Skinner
The Old Northwest: A Chronicle of the Ohio Valley & Beyond - Frederic Austin Ogg
The Reign of Andrew Jackson: A Chronicle of the Frontier in Politics - Frederic Austin Ogg
The Paths of Inland Commerce: A Chronicle of Trail - Archer Butler Hulbert
Adventures of Oregon: A Chronicle of the Fur Trade - Constance Lindsey Skinner
The Spanish Borderlands: A Chronicle of Old Florida & the Southwest - Herbert Eugene Bolton
Texas & the Mexican War: A Chronicle of the Winning of the Southwest - Nathaniel W. Stephenson
The Forty-Niners: A Chronicle of the California Trail & El Dorado - Stewart Edward White
The Passing of the Frontier: A Chronicle of the Old West - Emerson Hough
The Cotton Kingdom: A Chronicle of the Old South - William Edward Dodd
The Anti-Slavery Crusade: A Chronicle of the Gathering Storm - Jesse Macy
Abraham Lincoln & the Union: A Chronicle of the Embattled North - Nathaniel W. Stephenson
The Day of the Confederacy: A Chronicle of the Embattled South - Nathaniel W. Stephenson
Captains of the Civil War: A Chronicle of the Blue & the Gray - William Charles Henry Wood
The Sequel of Appomattox: A Chronicle of the Reunion of the States - Walter Lynwood Fleming
The American Spirit in Education: A Chronicle of Great Teachers - Edward Emery Slosson
The American Spirit in Literature: A Chronicle of Great Interpreters - Bliss Perry
Our Foreigners: A Chronicle of Americans in the Making - Samuel Peter Orth
The Old Merchant Marine: A Chronicle of American Ships & Sailors - Ralph Delahaye Painee
The Age of Invention: A Chronicle of Mechanical Conquest - Holland Thompson
The Railroad Builders: A Chronicle of the Welding of the States - John Moody
The Age of Big Business: A Chronicle of the Captains of Industry - Burton J. Hendrick
The Armies of Labor: A Chronicle of the Organized Wage-Earners - Samuel Peter Orth
The Masters of Capital: A Chronicle of Wall Street - John Moody
The New South: A Chronicle of Social & Industrial Evolution - Holland Thompson
The Boss & the Machine: A Chronicle of the Politicians & Party Organization - Samuel Peter Orth
The Cleveland Era: A Chronicle of the New Order in Politics - Allen Johnson
The Agrarian Crusade: A Chronicle of the Farmer in Politics - Solon Justus Buck
The Path of Empire: A Chronicle of the U.S. as a World Power - Carl Russell Fish
Theodore Roosevelt & His Times: A Chronicle of the Progressive Movement - Harold Howland
Woodrow Wilson & the World War: A Chronicle of Our Own Times - Charles Seymour
The Canadian Dominion: A Chronicle of Our Northern Neighbor - Oscar D. Skelton
The Hispanic Nations of the New World: A Chronicle of Our Southern Neighbors - William R. Shepherd


== Films ==
In 1923, Yale decided to create a series of films based on the books. Fifteen films were ultimately produced.

The Pilgrims (1924) directed by Edwin L. Hollywood
The Puritans (1924)
Dixie (1924)


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Chronicles of America at Wikimedia Commons