Galgenlieder (transl. Gallows Songs) is a collection of nonsensical poems by Christian Morgenstern. Following ten years of writing work, it was first published in March 1905 by Bruno Cassirer. And illustrations in a different edition were done by the famous Switzerland Cuban and surrealist artist, Paul Klee in 1914. Basically, in these poems are weird and half macabre sensorying around gallows which it was quite known for gallows humor. Some of them would actually feature a certain item, furniture, a tool, an animal, an insect, or even a lost limb.
Some parts of the poems even has the telling of characters. Palmstroem who is some type of person wandering around, expecting something to happen to him, but it doesn't, because he's lonely. The Gallows child who's a child of gallows hill has a trouble of thinking, but mostly he is to be a representation of a child who has depression. The Raven Ralph is a normal raven who ends up eating gallows food, and in the poem, he lays dead at the end.  The moonsheep who is a normal sheep with white Fleece who is waiting to be sheared, also he's up passing away that very morning of the poem. Some of which theorized that the sheep supposed to be a representation of death and time. A knee is a disembodied knee who wanders around the earth after being shot in the war. Sophia, who is the executioner's servant, in one poem Where the hangman sings a song to her that he's dead, but she's nobly great. Some theorized that he is it supposed to represent Jack ketch. 
Film Adaptations 
Canti della forca (Gallows Songs) is a live action stop motion film made in italy in 2014. Animated and Directed by Stefano Bessoni features five poems in it, while focusing on the creator himself.


== Poems ==
Titelansage " T
Motto. Dem Kinde sophia im Manne
Versu.ch einer Einleitung
Wie die Galgenlieder entstanden
Lass die Moleküle rasen
Bundeslied der Galgenbrüder
Galgenbruders Lied an Sophie, die Henkersmaid
Nein!
Das Gebet
Das Grosse Lalula
Der Zwölf-Elf
Das Mondschaf
Lunovis
Der Rabe Ralf
Fisches Nachtgesang
Galgenbruders Frühlingslied
Das Hemmed
Das Problem
Neue Bildungen, der Natur vorgeschlagen
Die Trichter
Der Tanz
Das Knie
Der Seufzer
Bim, Bam, Bum
Das ästhetische Wiesel
Der Schaukelstuhl auf der verlassenen Terrasse
Die Beichte des Wurms
Das Weiblein mit der Kunkel
Die Mitternachtsmaus
Himmel und Erde
Der Walfafisch oder das Überwasser
Mondendinge
Die Schildkröte
Der Hecht
Der Nachtschelm und das Siebenschwein
Die beiden Esel
Der Steinochs
Tapetenblume
Das Wasser
Die Luft
Wer denn?
Der Lattenzaun
Die beiden Flaschen
Das Lied vom blonden Korken
Der Würfel
Kronprätendenten
Die Weste
Philanthropisch
Der Mond
Die Westküsten
Unter Zeiten
Unter Schwarzkünstlern
Der Traum der Magd
Zäzilie
Das Nasobem
Anto-Logie
Die Hysterix
Die Probe
Im Jahre 19000
Der Gaul
Der heroische Pudel
Das Huhn, Möwenlied
Igel und Agel
Der Werwolf
Die Fingur
Das Fest Des Wüstlings
Km 21
Geiß und Schleiche
Der Purzelbaum
Die zwei Wurzeln
Das Geburtslied oder die Zeichen
Galgenkindes Wiegenlied
Wie sich das Galgenkind die Monatsnamen merkt
Galgenberg


== English translations ==
The Gallows Songs. Christian Morgenstern's Galgenlieder, translated by Max Knight (University of California Press, 1964).
Gallows Songs, translated by W.D. Snodgrass and Lore Segal (Michigan Press, 1967).
Songs from the Gallows: Galgenlieder, translated by Walter Arndt (Yale University Press, 1993).
Lullabies, Lyrics and Gallows Songs, translated by Anthea Bell with illustrations by Lisbeth Zwerger (North South Books, 1995).
A number of these poems were translated into English by Jerome Lettvin with explanations of Morgensterns wordplay methods and their relationship to Lewis Carroll's methods. These were published in a journal called The Fat Abbot Archived 2016-04-05 at the Wayback Machine in the Fall Winter 1962 edition, along with an essay illuminating subtle characteristics of the originals.


=== Selected translations ===


== Visual poems ==
"Fisches Nachtgesang" ("Fish's Night Song") consists only of patterns of macrons and breves printed to suggest fish scales or ripples.


== Musical settings ==
Galgenlieder, six songs by Hanns Eisler 1917
Galgenlieder a 3 cycle of 15 songs by Sofia Gubaidulina (b.1931)
Galgenlieder a 5, cycle of 14 songs by Sofia Gubaidulina (b.1931)
Galgenlieder, 10 songs for mezzo and trio by Anders Brødsgaard (b.1955)
Galgenlieder, Op. 129, 8 songs for soprano' harp and tuba by Jan Koetsier (1911–2006)
Galgenlieder, chamber composition by Jacqueline Fontyn (b.1930)
Galgenlieder, five song cycle by Siegfried Strohbach for male choir a cappella.
Galgenlieder, five songs "Mondendinge" ; "Der Hecht" ; "Die Mitternachtsmaus" ; "Das Wasser" ; "Galgenkindes Wiegenlied", by Vincent Bouchot (b.1966)
Galgenlieder, 13 Movements for Saxophone Quartet and Children's Choir, by Lera Auerbach (b.1973)


== References ==