Rhesus (Ancient Greek: Ῥῆσος, Rhēsos) is an Athenian tragedy that belongs to the transmitted plays of Euripides. Its authorship has been disputed since antiquity, and the issue has invested modern scholarship since the 17th century when the play's authenticity was challenged, first by Joseph Scaliger and subsequently by others, partly on aesthetic grounds and partly on account of peculiarities in the play's vocabulary, style and technique. The conventional attribution to Euripides remains controversial.
Rhesus takes place during the Trojan War, on the night when Odysseus and Diomedes make their way covertly into the Trojan camp. The same event is narrated in book 10 of Homer's epic poem, the Iliad.
Character Descriptions: 
Odysseus- Greek King and the hero of Homer’s poem the Odysseus 
Hector- Trojan prince
Diomedes-  a hero in Greek mythology 
Aeneas- Trojan hero
Paris- Brother to Hector
Dolon- fought for Troy and spy 
Athena- Greek Goddess of wisdom, warfare, & handicraft 
Muse- Goddesses of art, literature, & science  
Rhesus- King of Thrace


== Plot synopsis ==
In the middle of the night, Trojan guards on the lookout for suspicious enemy activity sight bright fires in the Greek camp. They promptly inform Hector, who almost issues a general call to arms before Aeneas persuades him this would be ill-advised. The best course, Aeneas argues, would be to send someone to spy on the Greek camp and see what the enemy is up to. Dolon volunteers to spy on the Greeks in exchange for Achilles's horses when the war is won. Hector accepts the offer and sends him out. Dolon leaves wearing the skin of a wolf, and planning on deceiving the Greeks by walking on all fours. Next, Rhesus, the king of the distant but contiguous nation of Thrace, arrives to assist the Trojans soon after Dolon sets out. Hector berates him for coming so many years late, but accepts his arrival; Rhesus responds that he had intended on coming from the beginning, but had been sidetracked defending his own land from an attack by Scythians.
Meanwhile, making their way to the Trojan encampment with the intention of killing Hector, Odysseus and Diomedes run into Dolon and kill him. When they reach their destination Athena guides them to Rhesus' sleeping quarters instead of Hector's, warning them that they are not destined to kill Hector. Diomedes kills Rhesus and others, and Odysseus takes his prized horses, before making their escape. Rumors spread from Rhesus' men that there had been treachery and that Hector was responsible. Hector arrives and casts blame on the sentinels, for, pointing to the sly tactics indicating that the guilty party could only be Odysseus. The mother of Rhesus, one of the nine muses, then arrives and lays blame on all those responsible: Odysseus, Diomedes, and Athena. She also announces the imminent resurrection of Rhesus, who will become immortal but will be sent to live in a cave.
This short play is most notable in comparison with the Iliad. Here, Dolon's role is pushed to the background, and much more is revealed about Rhesus and the reactions of the Trojans to his murder.


== Authorship controversy ==
The first since ancient times to fully dispute that the Rhesus had been written by Euripides was L. C. Valckenaer in his Phoenissae (1755) and Diatribe in Euripidis deperditorum dramatum reliquias (1767). In an introduction to Rhesus, Gilbert Murray wrote that passages from the play were quoted by early Alexandrian writers. The ancient hypotheses transmitted along with the play, however, show that its authenticity was attacked by a number of scholars whose names are not given. Cases against Euripides' authorship generally center on stylistic differences. Murray argued that these may be attributable simply to the play being an early work by a younger or less-developed Euripides, or the possibility of its being an edited version of a Euripidean play, perhaps made by a contemporary or by Euripides' son. Edith Hall argued in an introduction that modern readers "will be struck in particular by the un-Euripidean lack of interest in women," and noted the fact of Euripides' son having borne the tragedian's name as an argument against the conventional attribution. A recent theory by Vayos Liapis is that the Rhesus was composed by an unknown author in the court of Philip II or Alexander the Great at the end of the 4th century BC.
Richmond Lattimore asserted in 1958 that the Rhesus had been written by Euripides, probably at some point before 440 BC, and in 1964, William Ritchie defended the play's authenticity in a book-length study, though his conclusions were opposed by Eduard Fraenkel. Michael Walton has also claimed that modern scholarship agrees with classical authorities in ascribing the play to Euripides, but admitted in a later work that the attribution is still disputed by a number of scholars.
The author of Rhesus has been questioning for some time. An article by Anastasia-Stavroula Valtadorou did point out that the authorship is under debate in 2016. Every time someone thinks the author of Rhesus could be, the findings would be inauthenticity. It is hard to find out the actual author of the play because many people's claims turn out to be false or debunked.


== Translations ==
Robert Potter, 1783 - verse: full text
Michael Wodhull, 1809 - verse: The Nineteen Tragedies and Fragments of Euripides, Vol. II full text: Internet Archive
Edward P. Coleridge, 1891 – prose: The Plays of Euripides full text: Perseus
Arthur S. Way, 1896 – verse: The Tragedies of Euripides in English Verse, Vol. II full text: Internet Archive
Gilbert Murray, 1913 – verse: The Rhesus of Euripides full text: Perseus
Richmond Lattimore, 1958 – verse: available for digital loan
James Morwood, 2000 - In Bacchae and Other Plays, Oxford World's Classics. ISBN 9780199540525
John Davie, 2005 – prose in The Bacchae and Other Plays, Penguin Classics. ISBN 9780140447262
George Theodoridis, 2010 – prose: full text
Brian Vinero, 2025 – rhymed verse, [1]


== References ==


== Sources ==
Hall, Edith. 2008. Introduction. In Bacchae and Other Plays, Oxford World's Classics. ISBN 0199540527.
Walton, J. Michael. 1997. Introduction. In Plays VI. By Euripides. Methuen Classical Greek Dramatists ser. London: Methuen. vii–xxii. ISBN 0-413-71650-3.
Walton, J. Michael, Euripides Our Contemporary, University of California Press, 2009, ISBN 0520261798.


== Further reading ==
Fantuzzi, Marco, ed. The Rhesus Attributed to Euripides. Cambridge Classical Texts and Commentaries. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021.
Fenik, B. C. Iliad X and the Rhesus. The myth. Collection Latomus; LXXIII. Bruxelles: Latomus, 1964.
Fries, Almut. Pseudo-Euripides, "Rhesus": Edited with Introduction and Commentary. Berlin, München, Boston: De Gruyter, 2014.
Liapis, V. A Commentary on the Rhesus Attributed to Euripides. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Ritchie, W. The Authenticity of the Rhesus of Euripides. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1964. full text available for digital loan: Internet Archive


== External links ==
 The full text of Rhesus at Wikisource (multiple English translations)