The Chaitanya Charitamrita (Sanskrit: चैतन्यचरितामृत, romanized: Caitanya-caritāmṛta; Bengali: চৈতন্যচরিতামৃত, romanized: Côitônyôcôritamṛtô), composed by Krishnadasa Kaviraja between c. 1582 and the early 17th-century, is one of the primary biographies detailing the life and teachings of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the founder of Gaudiya Vaishnavism. It is written in Bengali with a great number of Sanskrit verses in its devotional, poetic construction, including Shikshashtakam. The stories of Chaitanya's life are mixed with philosophical conversations detailing the process of Bhakti yoga, with special attention given to congregational chanting of the names of Krishna.


== Contents ==

The Chaitanya Caritamrta is divided into three sections: Adi-lila (Early pastimes), Madhya-lila (Middle pastimes) and Antya-lila (Final pastimes). Each section refers to a particular phase in Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's life:


=== Adi-lila ===
The Adi-lila explains Chaitanya's unique theological identity (Krishna in the mood of Radharani—a combined avatar), the duality and characteristics of Radha-Krishna explained both directly and using metaphor, his six transcendental expansions, his lineage, his closest childhood companions and their lineage, and his devotional associates. It ends with a brief summary of his life up to his acceptance of sannyasa.


=== Madhya-lila ===
The Madhya-lila details Chaitanya's sannyasa; Madhavendra Puri's life; Chaitanya's philosophical conversation with Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya (Advaitin scholar) promoting bhakti as supreme over the impersonal view; Chaitanya's pilgrimage to South India; the daily and annual activities of Chaitanya and his devotees during the Ratha Yatra festival near Jagannath Temple (Puri, Odisha); their observance of other festivities; and Chaitanya's instructions on the process of Bhakti yoga to both Rupa Goswami and Sanatana Goswami.


=== Antya-lila ===
The Antya-lila describes the devotional plays composed by Rupa Goswami, Chaitanya's interactions with the occasional critics as well as his devotees such as Raghunatha dasa Goswami, and Jagadananda Pandita, and Chaitanya's increasing agony of separation from Krishna (viraha or vipralambha bhava). It concludes with the Chaitanya's Shikshashtakam (eight verses of poetic instruction).


== Composition of the Chaitanya Charitamrita ==
Although the author, Krishnadasa Kaviraja, never met Chaitanya Mahaprabhu personally, his guru,Raghunatha dasa Goswami, was an associate of Chaitanya and was close to others who were intimates of his. In composing his work, Krishnadasa Kaviraja also referred to the Shri Krishna Chaitanya Charanamrita (Śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-caraṇāmṛta) of Murari Gupta and also the works of Svarupa Damodara, both of whom knew Chaitanya.
Krishna Dasa Kaviraja composed the Chaitanya Charitamrita in his old age after being requested by the Vaishnavas of Vrindavana to write a hagiography about the life of Chaitanya. Although there was already a biography written by Vrindavana Dasa, called the Chaitanya Bhagavata, the later years of Chaitanya's life were not detailed in that work. Krishna Dasa's Chaitanya Charitamrita covers Chaitanya's later years and also explains in detail the rasa philosophy that Chaitanya and his followers expounded. The Chaitanya Charitamrita also serves as a compendium of Gaudiya Vaishnava practices and outlines the Gaudiya theology developed by the Goswamis in metaphysics, ontology and aesthetics.
The Chaitanya Charitamrita was frequently copied and widely circulated amongst the Vaishnava communities of Bengal and Odisha during the early 17th Century. Its popularity during this period can be attributed to the propagation of three Vaishnava preachers—Narottama Dasa, Shyamananda and Srinivasa—who were trained by Jiva Goswami and Krishnadasa Kaviraja himself.


== Modern publication and translations ==
In 1913, the earliest (partial) English translation of the Chaitanya Charitamrita was authored by Jadunath Sarkar, entitled Chaitanya's Life And Teachings. From the 1920s through the late-20th century, it was circulated among European libraries and appeared in academic journals. While other early English literature on Caitanya Mahāprabhu's life was often criticized for being tangential and speculative, Chaitanya's Life And Teachings has had a generally favorable reputation.
Indologist Rahul Peter Das noted in 1993, "Although there are now several (complete) English translations... [Chaitanya's Life And Teachings] is... welcomed, if only for the elegance of its refined language, which... create[s] an atmosphere of poetry that is probably not possible in either typical "Indian English" or modern American English." It is still in print; the latest edition was issued in March 2025.  
Despite the distribution of Jadunath Sarkar's Chaitanya's Life And Teachings amongst Westerners, the Caitanya-caritāmṛta would not reach mainstream Western audiences until the emergence of the Hare Krishna Movement. 
In 1974, A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (founder of the Hare Krishna Movement), published Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta in English as a 17-volume set of books. It includes the original verses, transliterations, translations, and purports. His commentaries are based on Bhaktivinoda Thakur's Amrita Pravaha and Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati's Anubhasya commentaries. His publication significantly popularized the Chaitanya Charitamrita in the West and helped spread Gaudiya Vaishnavism outside of India.


== See also ==


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Publications
Sri Chaitanya-charitamrta (in Bengali), published by Sri Chaitanya Matha. Kolkata, 1992.
Printed sources
Stewart, Tony K. (2010). The Final Word: The Caitanya Caritāmṛta and the Grammar of Religious Tradition. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-539272-2.
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, translated by A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, LCCN 74193363, Wikidata Q108771289
Kaviraja, Krishna-das (1922). Chaitanya's Life and Teachings. Translated by Sarkar, Jadunath (2nd ed.). Sr Gouranga Press (published 2025). ISBN 9789366380247. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)
Prabhupada, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami (2017) [1 January 1968]. Teachings of Lord Caitanya. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. ISBN 9780892135370.
Web sources
Stewart, Tony K. (2012). "Chaitanya Charitamrita". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (in Bengali and English) (2nd ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh.