Roman de Rou ("Romance of Rollo") is a verse chronicle by Wace in Norman covering the history of the Dukes of Normandy from the time of Rollo of Normandy to the Battle of Tinchebray in 1106. It is a national epic of Normandy.
Following the success of his Roman de Brut, which recounted the history of the Britons, Wace was apparently commissioned by Henry II of England to write a similar account of the origins of the Normans and their conquest of England. Wace abandons his tale before bringing it up to date. He tells the reader in the final lines of Part III, that the king had entrusted the same task to a Maistre Beneeit (believed to be Benoît de Sainte-More).
The work was started in the year 1160, and Wace seems to have performed his last revisions in the mid-1170s.


== Composition ==
The work consists of:

a 315-line account of the Dukes in reverse chronological order known as the Chronique Ascendante. This is believed by some scholars not to be an original part of the Rou, but a separate work by Wace.
a 4,425-line section in alexandrines known as Part II
an 11,440-line section in octosyllables known as Part III
A 750-line section known as Le Romaunz de Rou et des dus de Normendie appended in some editions appears to be an early draf that was, abandoned and later reworked into the final redaction.


== Sources ==
Wace used as sources for his history of the Dukes of Normandy:

Gesta Normannorum Ducum
De moribus et actis primorum Normanniae ducum by Dudo of Saint-Quentin
Gesta Guillelmi by William of Poitiers
Gesta regum Anglorum by William of Malmesbury
Brevis relatio de Guillelmo nobilissimo comite Normannorum
oral tradition, including information from his father, and his own eyewitness


== See also ==
Anglo-Norman literature


== References ==


== External links ==
Andressen, Hugo, ed. (1879). Maistre Wace's Roman de Rou et des ducs de Normandie (in Old English and German). Heilbronn: Verlag Gebr. Henninger – via Internet Archcive.
Master Wace his Chronicle of the Norman Conquest from Roman de Rou. Translated by Taylor, Edgar. London: William Pickering. 1837 – via 1066.co.nz.