A Christmas Carol, the 1843 novella by Charles Dickens (1812–1870), is one of the English author's best-known works. It is the story of Ebenezer Scrooge, a greedy miser who hates Christmas but who is transformed into a caring, kindly person through the visitations of four ghosts (Jacob Marley and the ghosts of Christmas past, present, and future). The classic work has been dramatised and adapted countless times for virtually every medium and performance genre, and new versions appear regularly.


== Public readings ==
The novel was the subject of Dickens's first public reading, given in Birmingham Town Hall to the Industrial and Literary Institute on 27 December 1853. This was repeated three days later to an audience of 'working people', and was a great success by his own account and that of newspapers of the time. Over the years, Dickens edited and adapted the piece for a listening, rather than reading, audience. Dickens continued to give public readings of A Christmas Carol until his death.
Public readings of the novel continue to be held today, with some readers performing in character as Dickens. In 1994, a public reading was performed at the Pierpont Morgan Library in New York City and broadcast on PBS, with James Earl Jones performing the role of Scrooge with Martin Sheen (who played all the other parts) and Robert MacNeil (who acted as commentator at different times).


== Theatre and stage productions ==
An early theatrical production was A Christmas Carol: Or, the Miser's Warning!, a two-act adaptation of A Christmas Carol by C. Z. Barnett, first produced at the Surrey Theatre on 5 February 1844, just weeks after the publication of the novella. A version by Edward Stirling, A Christmas Carol; or, Past, Present, and Future, sanctioned by Charles Dickens, opened at the Adelphi Theatre in London on 26 February 1844, running for more than 40 nights.


=== 19th and 20th centuries ===
Throughout the late 19th century and into the early years of the 20th, British actor Seymour Hicks toured England with his own non-musical adaptation of the story, in which he played Scrooge.
A Christmas Carol (1975), a theatrical adaptation by playwright Barbara Field, premiered at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis. It was revived annually through 1995. In 1996, Field wrote a new adaptation for the Guthrie, which played annually until 2009. In 2010, the Guthrie commissioned Crispin Whittell to adapt the novella and that version played until 2019. Since 2021, the Guthrie has produced an adaptation annually by Lavina Jadhwani.
A Christmas Carol: Scrooge and Marley (1980), a theatrical adaptation by playwright Israel Horovitz, starred Orson Bean as Scrooge and premiered at the Charles Playhouse in Boston. The following year, Gene Rayburn played Scrooge.
A Christmas Carol (1981), a musical adaptation with music by Michel Legrand and a book and lyrics by Sheldon Harnick that premiered in 1982 at the Hartman Theatre, Stamford, Connecticut. The show was adapted for a touring production in 1981.
A Christmas Carol (1983), a theatrical adaptation by Jeffrey Sanzel has been performed annually at Theatre Three in Port Jefferson, New York for 28 years.
A Christmas Carol (1985), an adaptation by Bille Brown with music and staging by W. Stuart McDowell, was performed at the Symphony Space in New York City as a fundraiser for the Riverside Shakespeare Company, with narration by Helen Hayes, featuring Len Cariou as Scrooge and MacIntyre Dixon, Celeste Holm, Raul Julia, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Harold Scott, Carole Shelley, and Fritz Weaver, with the children's choir of the Anglo-American School. This script was restaged the following year at the Marriott Theatre in Lincolnshire, Illinois, produced by McDowell and directed by Robert Small, narrated by Ms. Hayes, featuring F. Murray Abraham as Scrooge, Ossie Davis as Marley's Ghost, with June Havoc, and Rex Smith as Bob Cratchit.
A Christmas Carol (1988), Patrick Stewart's one-man reading/acting of the story, made its first appearance in London and later on Broadway. On stage Stewart used a table, chair, stool, lectern and a book with an oversized print cover to enact the entire story. The production has been revived in London and New York several times. It has also been released on compact disc.
Mr. Scrooge (1989–present), written by William Goldsmith with music and lyrics by Janet Yates Vogt and Mark Friedman for Columbus Children's Theatre in Columbus, Ohio.
A Christmas Carol – A Ghost Story of Christmas (1990), a theatrical adaptation by Michael Wilson (director), with original music by John Gromada, was performed at the Alley Theatre for 19 years (1990–1998; 2005–present); Hartford Stage for 17 years (1998–present) and at Washington D.C.'s Ford's Theater for 11 years, with the script published by Dramatists Play Service.
The Scrooge Diary (Canada) (1990–present; in the USA, the play was retitled Scrooge Tells All). Adaptation by Avril Kelly, performed by Welsh actor Phil Arnold in a solo stage performance. A later performance was licensed for two performances only by John Gray, late of the Royal Shakespeare Company.
A Christmas Carol (1990), a theatrical adaptation written by David H Bell and produced by Alliance Theatre. The production has been revived annually for more than 30 seasons.
A Musical Christmas Carol (1992–present), adapted by David H. Bell for the Pittsburgh CLO in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Starring as Scrooge were Edmund Lyndeck (1992–1995, 1999–2007), Bingo O'Malley (1996–1998), Tom Atkins (2008–2015), Patrick Page (2016–2017), Richard Thomas (performed live and streamed online in 2018; re-broadcast in 2020; returned live in 2021), Mark Jacoby (2019), Michael Cerveris (2022–2023), Charles Shaughnessy (2024), and Denis O'Hare (2025).
Scrooge: The Musical (1992), a British stage musical adapted from the 1970 film and starring Anthony Newley.
A Christmas Carol (1993–present), a one-man show of the work performed by Gerald Charles Dickens, great-great-grandson of Charles Dickens, in which he plays 26 characters.
A Christmas Carol: The Musical (1994), a Broadway adaptation with music by Alan Menken and lyrics by Lynn Ahrens, ran at The Theatre at Madison Square Garden, New York City yearly until 2003. Starring as "Scrooge" were Walter Charles (1994), Terrence Mann (1995), Tony Randall (1996), Hal Linden and Roddy McDowall (alternating) (1997), Roger Daltrey (1998), Tony Roberts (1999), Frank Langella (2000), Tim Curry (2001), F. Murray Abraham (2002) and Jim Dale (2003). The 2004 television version of the musical starred Kelsey Grammer as "Scrooge".


=== 2000–2009 ===
A Christmas Carol (2000–19), an adaptation written by Tom Wood for Citadel Theatre. The play ran seasonally for nineteen years before being replaced with a new version by playwright David van Belle
Steve Nallon's Christmas Carol (2003), theatrical adaptation starring impressionist Nallon as a number of famous people performing the roles of Dickens' characters.
Fellow Passengers (2004), a three-actor narrative theatre adaptation using nearly every word of the novel, first presented at Strawberry Theatre Workshop in Seattle.
A Christmas Carol: The Traditional Story with Modern Music (2005), a musical adaptation with music and lyrics by Matt Corriel and book by Erica Lipez, premiered at the Foothills Theatre in Worcester, MA in 2005 and is published by Dramatic Publishing Company.
A Christmas Carol (2008), a stage adaptation by Bryony Lavery with songs by Jason Carr, was written for the Chichester Youth Theatre and performed at Chichester Festival Theatre for Christmas 2008 and 2015. This adaptation was also performed by Birmingham Repertory Theatre for Christmas 2009 (with Peter Polycarpou as Scrooge, Hadley Fraser as Bob Cratchit and Rosalie Craig as Mrs Cratchit) and 2013 and the West Yorkshire Playhouse for Christmas 2010 (with Phillip Whitchurch as Scrooge).
A Christmas Carol (2008), an adaptation written and directed by Kevin Von Feldt and staged at The Kodak Theater. The cast included Christopher Lloyd as Scrooge, John Goodman as The Ghost of Christmas Present, Jane Leeves as Mrs. Cratchit, with pre-recorded narration from John Gielgud.
A Christmas Carol (2009), an adaptation written and directed by Susie McKenna and featuring original music by Steve Edis. In this adaptation, the story is presented as a play-within-a-play, as told by a miserly uncle and his nephew while locked inside a theatre. The play was performed at Arts Theatre and starred comedian Gareth Hale as Scrooge/Uncle Sidney.


=== 2010–present ===
A Christmas Carol (2010), a new stage adaptation written by Jim Cook Jr. and produced by the Off Broad Street Players Theater Company in Bridgeton, New Jersey. Follows much of the original text of the novella with some character relationships explored. Premiered in November 2010.
A Christmas Carol (2010), a stage adaptation by The Pantaloons theatre company, touring England in Winter 2010.
A Christmas Carol (2010), a musical stage adaptation by Bruce Greer and Keith Ferguson that premiered in Carrollton, Texas, in December 2010.
A Christmas Carol (2011), a National Theatre of Scotland production adapted, designed and directed by Graham McLaren, premiered at Film City Glasgow. The production was awarded Best Production and Best Ensemble by the Critics' Awards for Theatre in Scotland.
A Christmas Carol (2012), a musical adaptation with book and lyrics by Ben Horslen and John Risebero and music by Christopher Peake and Nick Barstow, first performed by Antic Disposition in Middle Temple Hall, London, in December 2012 and revived in 2014, 2015, 2017 and 2019. A cast recording featuring Brian Blessed as The Ghost of Christmas Present was released in 2019.
Scrooge No More! (2014–present), a 35-minute musical adaptation by Alan Zachary and Michael Weiner for Busch Gardens Williamsburg in Williamsburg, Virginia. Originally announced as a contemporary adaptation following "washed-up rockstar" Eddie Kneezer, these plans were quietly abandoned in favour of a direct abridged adaptation of the Dickens novella.
A Christmas Carol (2015), an adaptation by Patrick Barlow, starring Jim Broadbent as "Scrooge" at Noël Coward Theatre in London.
A Christmas Carol (2017), a new adaptation by Jack Thorne, directed by Matthew Warchus for The Old Vic. Original cast included Rhys Ifans as Scrooge. The production has played every year since due to popular demand (including via live broadcast for the Christmas 2020 season due to the COVID-19 pandemic), with Christopher Eccleston as Scrooge in 2023 and John Simm as Scrooge in 2024, and ran at the Lyceum Theatre on Broadway 7 November 2019 – 5 January 2020 with Campbell Scott as Scrooge, winning 5 Tony Awards.
A Christmas Carol (2017), a new adaptation by David Edgar, directed by Rachel Kavanaugh for the Royal Shakespeare Company. Cast included Phil Davis as Scrooge. This production was revived for Christmas 2018 with Aden Gillet as Scrooge and will be revived again for the Christmas 2022 season with Adrian Edmondson as Scrooge.
Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol (2018), a one-man adaptation of the story performed by Jefferson Mays at Geffen Playhouse, Los Angeles. In 2020, the show was filmed live at New York's United Palace and released for a limited time on streaming site on the Stage. The show premiered at Broadway's Nederlander Theatre in November 2022.
Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol (2018), an adaptation by Nelle Lee for Shake & Stir Theatre Co, Brisbane. The play first premiered at the Queensland Performing Arts Centre and included Eugene Gilfedder as Scrooge, Lee as Mrs. Cratchit, and Bryan Probets as all four ghosts. Since then, the play has received seasonal revivals.
A Christmas Carol: The Live Radio Play (2020), a site specific adaptation written by Leora Morris and Ben Coleman and produced by Alliance Theatre. The production was presented as a drive-in performance at Georgia State University's Center Parc Credit Union, with the audience watching the show on big screens from their cars.
A Christmas Carol (2020), adapted and directed by Nicholas Hytner for the Bridge Theatre, London, features three actors. Opened in December 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic before returning in December 2022.
A Christmas Carol: A Ghost Story (2021), an adaptation by Mark Gatiss (who also played Marley), directed by Adam Penford ran at the Nottingham Playhouse and then Alexandra Palace Theatre for Christmas 2021 season
A VHS Christmas Carol (2021), a 1980s musical style adaptation by StarKid Productions with music by Clark Baxtresser. This adaptation was originally streamed as a pandemic-era online musical, with a free live performance recording released on YouTube in 2021. Though it adopts an American 1980s aesthetic in its music, lyrics, and design elements, the show otherwise maintains all settings and plot points from the original novel. VHS would later be revised in 2023 to become VHS Christmas Carols, adding a first act adapting The Gift of the Magi and The Little Match Girl into two additional one-act musicals. In the Christmas Future sequence and epilogue of A Christmas Carol,  all three works are presented as taking place in the same continuity and that Scrooge's generosity resulted in positive outcomes on the other two stories.
A Christmas Carol (2022), a stage adaptation written by Morgan Lloyd Malcolm with songs by Eamonn O'Dwyer, was performed at Rose Theatre Kingston with Penny Layden as a gender-swapped Ebenezer Scrooge.
A Christmas Carol (2022), an adaptation by Hilary Bell for Ensemble Theatre, Sydney. The original cast included Bell's father John Bell as Scrooge.
A Christmas Carol – A Radio Play Live on Stage (2023), an adaptation by Martin Parsons for The Crime and Comedy Theatre Company. The cast included Colin Baker as Scrooge and Peter Purves as Charles Dickens, with Tom Baker joining the cast as Jacob Marley in 2024 in a specially filmed appearance.
Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol: A Spirited New Musical (2023–present), a 35-minute musical adaptation created for Six Flags Fiesta Texas in San Antonio, Texas.
A Christmas Carol (2024), an adaptation by Mike Kenny for Derby Theatre.
The Best Gift: A Christmas Carol Musical (2025), an original musical adaptation by Dick and Melodie Tunney first performed by the Southern Kentucky Performing Arts Center's resident company, the Ramsey Theatre Company.
Christmas Carol Goes Wrong (2025), comedy play by Henry Shields, Henry Lewis and Jonathan Sayer of Mischief Theatre. The fictitious Cornley Polytechnic Drama Society attempts to put on a stage adaptation of A Christmas Carol which is ruined by amateurism and personal rivalries. Based on Mischief's 2017 BBC TV special.


== Film and movie productions ==


=== Live action films ===


==== 1901–1950 ====

Scrooge, or, Marley's Ghost (1901), starring Daniel Smith as Scrooge. A short, silent, British film produced by Paul's Animatograph Works, regarded as the earliest surviving film adaptation of A Christmas Carol.
A Christmas Carol (1908), starring Thomas Ricketts as Scrooge. Produced in Chicago by Essanay Studios, and regarded as the earliest adaptation produced in the US. The film is regarded as lost.
A Christmas Carol (1910), starring Marc McDermott as Scrooge and Charles Ogle as Bob Cratchit, with William Bechtel, Viola Dana, Carey Lee, and Shirley Mason. A 13-minute version produced by Edison Studios in The Bronx, New York.
Il sogno dell'usuraio (1910), an Italian silent film.
Scrooge (1913), starring Seymour Hicks as Scrooge. Hicks also starred in the 1935 adaptation. Produced in Britain by the Zenith Film Company, the film was re-titled Old Scrooge for its 1926 US release.
A Christmas Carol (1914), starring Charles Rock as Scrooge.
The Right to Be Happy (1916), directed by and starring Rupert Julian as Scrooge. Regarded as the first feature-length adaptation. The film is regarded as lost.
Scrooge (1922), starring Henry V. Esmond as Scrooge. An 18-minute version, directed by George Wynn. Reissued in 1929 in a 10-minute "sound film" version (musical score only).
A Christmas Carol (1923), starring Russell Thorndike as Scrooge, Forbes Dawson as Fred, Nina Vanna as Fred's wife, and Jack Denton as Jacob Marley. Produced in the UK.
Scrooge (1928), starring Bransby Williams as Scrooge. A short film, made by British Sound Film Productions using the Lee DeForest Phonofilm sound-on-film process.
Scrooge (1935), starring Seymour Hicks as Scrooge, Donald Calthrop as Bob Cratchit, and Philip Frost as Tiny Tim. Hicks had previously starred in the 1913 adaptation. This film was produced in Britain by Julius Hagen Productions, and released that same year in the United States by Paramount Pictures. An hourlong edition was released to schools and libraries in 1941; many video versions derive from this edited version.
A Christmas Carol (1938), a US version starring Reginald Owen as Scrooge, Terry Kilburn as Tiny Tim,  and Gene Lockhart and Kathleen Lockhart as the Cratchits. Produced and released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.
A Christmas Carol (1940), starring Gregory Markopoulos as Scrooge. Notable for being the first known amateur film adaptation.
Leyenda de Navidad (Christmas Legend, 1947), a Spanish adaptation.


==== 1951–1999 ====
Scrooge (1951), retitled A Christmas Carol in the US, starring Alastair Sim as Scrooge, Michael Hordern as Jacob Marley, Mervyn Johns as Bob Cratchit, and Hermione Baddeley as Mrs. Emily Cratchit. Critic A. O. Scott of The New York Times regarded this film as the best adaptation ever made of the Dickens classic.
A Christmas Carol (1960), a British short film directed by Robert Hartford-Davis.
Scrooge (1970), a musical film adaptation starring Albert Finney as Scrooge and Alec Guinness as Marley's Ghost.
The Muppet Christmas Carol (1992), a musical film featuring The Muppets, with Michael Caine as Scrooge.


==== 2000–present ====
A Christmas Carol (2012), a  digital film adaptation released online starring Vincent Fegan as Scrooge. It was released worldwide by Guerilla Films via the Distrify player at 12:01 am on 1 January 2012 on the Dickens Fellowship website and a number of other websites and Facebook pages, making it the first new production of a work by Charles Dickens in his bicentennial year.
Scrooge & Marley (2012), a modern retelling of the story featuring LGBTQ characters, with David Pevsner as Scrooge, Tim Kazurinsky as Marley's ghost, and Bruce Vilanch as Fezziwig.
A Christmas Carol (2015), an original musical featuring Colin Baker as Charles Dickens and Anthony D.P. Mann as Scrooge.
A Christmas Carol (2018), a BBC Films stage-to-film adaptation of a one-man performance by Simon Callow, which ran for several seasons on stage in London, based on Charles Dickens's own performance adaptation.
The Passion of Scrooge (2018), a film adaptation by H. Paul Moon of the opera by Jon Deak, featuring the composer with baritone William Sharp and the 21st Century Consort.
Spirited (2022), a modern musical comedy re-imagining focused on the perspective of the Ghosts, with Will Ferrell as the Ghost of Christmas Present and Ryan Reynolds as the person visited by the ghosts.
Christmas Karma (2025), a British Bollywood-inspired musical adaptation of the story starring Kunal Nayyar as the Scrooge-like character of Eshaan Sood.


=== Animated films ===


==== 1980–1999 ====
A Christmas Carol (1982), an animated made-for-television adaptation produced by Burbank Films Australia.
Mickey's Christmas Carol (1983), an animated featurette film featuring the various Walt Disney characters with Scrooge McDuck playing the role of Ebenezer Scrooge, Mickey Mouse as Bob Cratchit, Goofy as Jacob Marley, and Donald Duck as Fred.
A Christmas Carol (1991), starring Richard Newman as Scrooge.
A Christmas Carol (1994), an animated version produced by Jetlag Productions, written by Jack Olesker.
A Christmas Carol (1997), an animated production produced by DIC Productions, L.P. featuring the voice of Tim Curry as Scrooge as well as the voices of Whoopi Goldberg, Michael York and Ed Asner.
An All Dogs Christmas Carol (1998), an animated direct-to-video film and the de facto finale of the All Dogs Go to Heaven franchise; features the villainous Carface (Ernest Borgnine) as Scrooge, with Itchy (Dom DeLuise) as the Ghost of Christmas Past, Sasha (Sheena Easton) as Present, and Charlie (Steven Weber) as Future.


==== 2000–present ====
Christmas Carol: The Movie (2001), an animated version produced by Illuminated Films (Christmas Carol), Ltd/The Film Consortium/MBP; screenplay by Robert Llewellyn & Piet Kroon; with the voices of Simon Callow, Kate Winslet and Nicolas Cage. Winslet also recorded the song "What If" to promote the film. This film has live action scenes, in which Simon Callow plays Charles Dickens, at the start during the opening credits and at the end prior to the closing credits.
A Christmas Carol (2006), a computer-animated adaptation featuring anthropomorphic animals in the lead roles.
Bah, Humduck! A Looney Tunes Christmas (2006), a modern retelling featuring Daffy Duck in the Scrooge role, and Bugs Bunny as the host.
Barbie in a Christmas Carol (2008), a retelling starring Barbie as Eden Starling, an opera singer in the role of Scrooge.
A Christmas Carol (2009), a performance capture film directed by Robert Zemeckis, and starring Jim Carrey as Scrooge and the three ghosts. From Walt Disney Pictures and ImageMovers, it was released in November 2009 in Disney Digital 3-D. This adaptation, while mostly faithful to the novel, includes such scenes as Scrooge being chased through London and being dropped into his own grave by the Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come.
Scrooge: A Christmas Carol (2022), an animated musical version and a remake of Scrooge (1970), produced by Timeless Films, directed by Stephen Donnelly, with Screenplay by Donnelly and Leslie Bricusse. It was released on 2 December 2022, on Netflix.


== Television adaptations ==


=== Live action television ===


==== 1943–1956 ====
Between 1943 and 1956, most television versions of the story were staged live.

A Christmas Carol (1943), starring William Podmore as Scrooge. Directed by George Lowther.
An early live television adaptation was broadcast by DuMont Television Network's New York station WABD on 20 December 1944.
Christmas Night, with a ballet and with music by Ralph Vaughan Williams was broadcast on BBC television on 25 December 1946.
A 25 December 1947 live television version on DuMont starred John Carradine as Scrooge, and featured David Carradine and Eva Marie Saint, the latter in her TV debut.
A 24 December 1948 live television version on ABC performed by the Rufus Rose Marionettes.
A 1948 live television adaptation which aired on The Philco Television Playhouse starred Dennis King as Scrooge.
The Christmas Carol, broadcast 25 December 1949, is a 30-minute television adaptation that starred Taylor Holmes as Scrooge with Vincent Price as the on-screen narrator. Other cast: Robert Hyatt as Tiny Tim, Patrick Whyte as Bob Cratchit, Queenie Leonard as Mrs. Emily Cratchit, Constance Cavendish as Martha Cratchit, Jill St. John as Missie Cratchit, Karen Kester as Belinda Cratchit, and Robert Clarke as Fred.
A British television version, with Bransby Williams as Scrooge, was televised in 1950.
An adaptation of A Christmas Carol with Ralph Richardson as Scrooge was shown as a 30-minute filmed episode of NBC's Fireside Theater in 1951.
The story was dramatised twice, in 1952 and 1953, on Kraft Television Theatre (NBC).
A Christmas Carol (1954), a filmed musical television adaptation starring Fredric March as Scrooge and Basil Rathbone as Marley, was shown on the TV anthology Shower of Stars. The adaptation and lyrics were by Maxwell Anderson, the music by Bernard Herrmann. The first version in color, only a black-and-white version is currently known to survive. March received an Emmy Award nomination for his performance.
Eye on New York (1955) A live broadcast on A Christmas Carol with Jonathan Harris as Scrooge
Story of the Christmas Carol (1955), starring Norman Gottschalk as Scrooge. Directed by David Barnhizer.
The Merry Christmas (1955), musical adaption starring Hugh Griffith as Scrooge.
The Stingiest Man in Town (1956) was the second musical adaptation. It starred Basil Rathbone and Vic Damone as, respectively, the old and young Scrooge. This was a live episode of the dramatic anthology series The Alcoa Hour.


==== 1958–1999 ====
None of the later versions were done live but were either shot on videotape or filmed. They include:

The Merry Christmas (1958), starring Stephan Murray as Scrooge and directed by Ronald Marriott.
Tales from Dickens: A Christmas Carol (1959), was another filmed episode of the half-hour anthology series, again featuring Rathbone as Scrooge, with Fredric March as narrator, produced by Desmond Davis, with the cooperation of The Dickensian Society, London, distributed by Coronet Films "Copyright 1959, Transcription Holdings Ltd.".
"Carol For Another Christmas" (1964) was a modernised adaptation directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz and written by Rod Serling for the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) network starring Sterling Hayden as the Scrooge character as well as Peter Sellers, Ben Gazzara, Robert Shaw, Pat Hingle, Steve Lawrence, Eva Marie Saint, James Shigeta and Britt Eckland.
Mr. Scrooge, a 1964 CBC television musical adaptation, starring Cyril Ritchard (Peter Pan's Captain Hook) as Scrooge, with Alfie Bass and Tessie O'Shea as Bob Cratchit and his wife.
Carry On Christmas was broadcast in 1969. Scripted by long-term Carry On author Talbot Rothwell, the story was an irreverent take on the tale and featured Sid James as Scrooge.
A Christmas Carol (1977), a BBC adaptation with Sir Michael Hordern, who had played Marley's Ghost in two other versions, as Scrooge.
Rich Little's Christmas Carol (1978), an HBO television special in which impressionist Rich Little plays several celebrities and characters in the main roles.
Scrooge (1978), starring Warren Graves as Scrooge.
An American Christmas Carol (1979) an American/Canadian production updating the story to Depression Era America starring Henry Winkler with R.H. Thomson, David Wayne, Dorian Harewood and Chris Wiggins.
A Christmas Carol (1984), starring George C. Scott as Ebenezer Scrooge, with David Warner and Susannah York as the Cratchits, Roger Rees as Fred, Angela Pleasence as the Ghost of Christmas Past and Edward Woodward as the Ghost of Christmas Present. Scott received an Emmy Award nomination for his performance. Clive Donner, who had been the film editor for the 1951 film Scrooge, directed. Novelist and essayist Louis Bayard described this adaptation as "the definitive version of a beloved literary classic", praising its fidelity to Dickens's original story, the strength of the supporting cast, and especially Scott's performance as Scrooge.
Buckaneezer Scrooge (1985), starring Ron Barge as Buckaneezer Scrooge. This Canadian adaption features real-life Scrooge interacting with puppet characters.
Conto de Natal (1988), short film made for Portuguese television. Directed by Lauro António.
Bah, Humbug!: The Story of Charles Dickens' 'A Christmas Carol' (1990), an abridged dramatic reading performed and recorded live at the Pierpont Morgan Library in New York City and broadcast on PBS. The production was based on Dickens's own adaptation for his dramatic readings. It was hosted by Robert MacNeil and featured James Earl Jones as Scrooge and Martin Sheen as the other characters.
A Christmas Carol (1999), a television movie directed by David Jones, starring Patrick Stewart as Ebenezer Scrooge. Inspired by Patrick Stewart's one-man stage adaptation of the story but featuring a full supporting cast, this was the first version of the story to make use of digital special effects. Stewart was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild award for his performance.


==== 2000–present ====
A Diva's Christmas Carol (2000) is a VH1-original Christmas television film starring Vanessa L. Williams, Rozonda "Chilli" Thomas, Brian McNamara and Kathy Griffin.
A Christmas Carol: The Musical (2004), starring Kelsey Grammer. This version is unique in that Scrooge meets all three spirits in human form both before and after his night-time encounters, much like in the same vein as The Wizard of Oz.
A Christmas Carol Goes Wrong (2017), a BBC One television special written by and starring Henry Lewis, Jonathan Sayer and Henry Shields and Mischief Theatre Company in which the fictional Cornley Polytechnic Drama Society disastrously attempts to perform a TV adaptation of the story. A follow up to their 2016 special  Peter Pan Goes Wrong. Derek Jacobi and Diana Rigg also star.
A Christmas Carol (2019), a BBC drama (broadcast in the US on FX) written by Peaky Blinders creator Steven Knight, with Guy Pearce as Scrooge, Andy Serkis as the Ghost of Christmas Past, Charlotte Riley as Lottie/the Ghost of Christmas Present, Stephen Graham as Jacob Marley, Joe Alwyn as Bob Cratchit, Jason Flemyng as the Ghost of Christmas Future, and Vinette Robinson as Mary Cratchit. Thea Achillea, who played Scrooge's daughter in episode 2, went on to star in A Christmas Carol, alongside Serkis. In that version, Serkis voiced Marley's Ghost.


=== Animated television ===
Mister Magoo's Christmas Carol (1962), an animated musical television special in color featuring the UPA character voiced by Jim Backus, with songs by Jule Styne and Bob Merrill.
A Christmas Carol (1969), a 45-minute children's afternoon special directed by Zoran Janjic and produced by Australia's Air Programs and aired in the U.S. on CBS on 13 December 1970. Ron Haddrick voiced Scrooge for the Australian production. It was the first in a series titled Famous Classic Tales and sponsored by Kenner when broadcast.
A Christmas Carol (1970), directed by John Salway and broadcast on Anglia Television.
A Christmas Carol (1971), an Oscar-winning animated short film by Richard Williams, with Alastair Sim and Michael Hordern reprising their roles from the 1951 film. This film was also released theatrically.
The Stingiest Man in Town (1978), a 51-minute animated made-for-TV musical produced by Rankin-Bass based on the 1956 live-action television musical, starring Walter Matthau as the voice of Scrooge and Tom Bosley as the narrator. Scrooge was drawn to physically resemble Matthau.
Bugs Bunny's Christmas Carol (1979), an animated television special featuring the various Looney Tunes characters, with the role of Scrooge going to Yosemite Sam.
A Christmas Carol (1982), an Australian made-for-television animated Christmas fantasy film from Burbank Films as part of the studio's series of Charles Dickens adaptations from 1982 to 1985. It was originally broadcast in 1982 through the Australian Nine Network.
Brer Rabbit's Christmas Carol (1992), an animated television movie directed by Al Guest and starring the voice of Christopher Corey Smith as Brer Rabbit.
A Flintstones Christmas Carol (1994), an animated television special based on The Flintstones series produced by Hanna-Barbera Productions, featuring the series' characters putting on a play based on the novel.
An episode of the animated series Pepper Ann, uses the storyline with a focus on Valentine's Day instead.
The animated series Beavis and Butt-head has an episode titled "Huh-Huh-Humbug", where Beavis dreams of being a Scrooge-like character.


=== Direct to Video ===
A Christmas Carol (1997), a direct-to-VHS animation of the story, featuring the voices of Tim Curry, Whoopi Goldberg and Michael York.
A Christmas Carol (2002), a bonus feature on the DVD release of Peter Ackroyd's docudrama Dickens, portraying a Christmas dinner at Gads Hill Place where Charles Dickens recites the novella to his family and friends. The author is portrayed by Anton Lesser, reprising his role from the docudrama.
A Sesame Street Christmas Carol (2006), a direct to DVD special featuring Oscar the Grouch in the Scrooge role.
The Smurfs: A Christmas Carol (2011), a direct to DVD imagining of the story, as told by and featuring the Smurfs.
2nd Chance for Christmas (2019), a direct to DVD re-imagining, a spoiled pop star (Brittany Underwood) takes the Scrooge role. Featuring Tara Reid, Vivica A. Fox, Jim O'Heir, Mark McGrath and the wrestler Rob Van Dam. Directed by Christopher Ray.


== Audio media productions ==


=== Radio ===


==== 1923–1999 ====
On 19 December 1923 BBC Radio broadcast an adaptation of the story by R. E. Jeffrey.
Lionel Barrymore starred as Scrooge in a dramatisation on the CBS Radio Network on 25 December 1934, beginning a tradition he would repeat on various network programs every Christmas through 1953. Only twice did he not play the role: in 1936, when his brother John Barrymore filled in because of the death of Lionel's wife, and again in 1938, when Orson Welles took over the role because Barrymore had fallen ill.
A 1940s adaptation starring Basil Rathbone as Scrooge was subsequently issued as a three-record set by Columbia Records.
On 24 December 1949, Favorite Story broadcast an adaptation with Ronald Colman both hosting and starring as Scrooge. This version used a script nearly identical to the one used in Colman's famous 1941 record album of the story, but a different supporting cast.
On 24 December 1949, Richard Diamond, Private Detective adapted the story with characters from the series playing the Dickens characters in the style of the radio series and transplanting the story to New York City, with Dick Powell in character as "Richard Diamond" narrating the story.
On 20 December 1953, The Six Shooter broadcast "Britt Ponset's Christmas Carol", in which the title character Britt Ponset tells a young boy who is running away from home a western version of A Christmas Carol, with Howard McNear playing the role of Eben (the Scrooge character).
Alec Guinness starred as Scrooge in a BBC production from 1951, also broadcast in America, and repeated for several years afterward.
On 24 December 1953, Theatre Royal, also from the BBC, starred Laurence Olivier in his only recorded performance as Scrooge.
On 25 December 1965, the BBC aired an hour-long radio version adapted by Charles Lefeaux with music composed and conducted by Christopher Whelen, and starring Ralph Richardson as both The Storyteller and Scrooge.
On 24 December 1973 and every year until 1987 WNBC-AM in New York City broadcast an adaption featuring prominent on-air staff Don Imus as Ebenezer Scrooge, Big Wilson as the Ghost of Christmas Past, Wolfman Jack as the Ghost of Christmas Present, Pat Whitley as the Ghost of Christmas Future, Murray The K as Bob Cratchit, Gordon Hammet as Jacob Marley and Donna Patrone as Tiny Tim.
In 1975, CBS Radio Mystery Theatre ran A Christmas Carol starring E. G. Marshall as Scrooge. This is the only episode in which Marshall appeared in a role other than host.
In 1979 KGO News/Talk radio presented a live radio play featuring the station's on-air personalities in the roles of Dickens's characters.
Beginning in 1990, NPR began broadcasting a version read by comedian Jonathan Winters, using the same script Dickens himself used in his readings. Winters plays all of the male roles. Many NPR stations play it every year on Christmas Eve or Christmas Day.
Another BBC Radio production, broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on 22 December 1990, starred Michael Gough as Scrooge and Freddie Jones as The Narrator. This production was subsequently re-broadcast on BBC Radio 7 and later on BBC Radio 4 Extra.
On 21 January 1995, BBC Radio 2 broadcast a complete production of the Leslie Bricusse musical Scrooge live from the Palace Theatre in Manchester, with Anthony Newley as Scrooge.
In 1995, Quicksilver Radio Theater broadcast a dramatisation directed by Jay Stern and starring Craig Wichman as Scrooge, Anthony Cinelli, John Prave, Ghislaine Nichols, Deborah Barta, Joseph Franchini, Jodi Botelho, Elizabeth Stull and Tony Scheinman. The production was originally aired on Max Schmid's The Golden Age of Radio on WBAI, New York, NY on Christmas Eve 1995 and repeated Christmas Day 1995, and is currently syndicated on National Public Radio. The program is currently part of the Theater Collection at the Paley Center for Media in New York.
Focus on the Family Radio Theatre adapted the story in a 1996 production hosted by David Suchet, narrated by Timothy Bateson and with Tenniel Evans as Scrooge. This production credits Noel Langley's screenplay for the 1951 film as well as Dickens's original book.
Paul Oakenfold's Urban Soundtracks (1999) included a remixed celebrity reading of the book, including sound effects and dance music in a version for UK dance radio stations.
WBZ Newsradio 1030 in Boston adapted the play for its radio listeners in 1999. It starred now-retired morning news anchor Gary LaPierre as Ebenezer Scrooge with members of the WBZ Newsradio staff (renamed the WBZ Radio Holiday Players) in various roles, including Carl Stevens as Scrooge's nephew Fred, Deb Lawlor as the Ghost of Christmas Past and New England Patriots play-by-play announcer Gil Santos as Marley's Ghost. WBZ radio producer Michael Coleman gave the prologue and played various characters in the play. It has been broadcast on WBZ every Christmas Eve since.


==== 2000–present ====
The Colonial Radio Theatre of Boston produced A Christmas Carol in 2004, and it has been broadcast yearly on Sirius XM Radio. It was released by Blackstone Audio in 2007. Brilliance Audio released the production on CD in 2010.
A Christmas Carol (2007), a theatrical audio version, written and directed by Arthur Yorinks from Night Kitchen Radio Theater, starring Peter Gerety, noted stage and film actor, as Scrooge. This faithful adaptation features a score by Edward Barnes and carols sung by members of the Frank Sinatra School of the Arts Concert Choir.
In 2008, David Jason recorded a 10 part abridged reading for BBC Radio 4's Book at Bedtime.
On 20 December 2014, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a new production adapted by Neil Brand for actors, the BBC Singers and the BBC Symphony Orchestra, recorded before an audience in the BBC Maida Vale Studios and directed by David Hunter. The cast included Robert Powell as Scrooge, Ron Cook as Marley and Tracy-Ann Oberman as Mrs. Fezziwig.
Texas Shakespeare Festival 2014 broadcast of "A Christmas Carol".
On 18 December 2015, Kathleen Turner starred as Scrooge in a live performance presented as a radio drama at the Greene Space in New York City; a recording of the performance was broadcast on WNYC on 24 and 25 December 2015. Previous broadcasts at the Greene Space featured F. Murray Abraham (2011), Brian Cox (2012), Tony Roberts (2013) and Mark-Linn Baker (2014) in the role of Scrooge.


=== Recordings ===


==== 1941–1999 ====
In 1941, Ronald Colman portrayed Scrooge in a famous American Decca four-record 78-RPM album of A Christmas Carol with a full supporting cast of radio actors and a score by Victor Young. This version was eventually transferred to LP and in 2005 appeared on a Deutsche Grammophon compact disc, along with its companion piece on LP, Mr. Pickwick's Christmas, narrated by Charles Laughton. (The Pickwick recording had originally been made in 1944.) The Ronald Colman A Christmas Carol is slightly abbreviated on both the LP and the CD versions; on the LP, this was done to fit the entire production onto one side of a 12-inch 33 RPM record. With the greater time available it was hoped that the CD would have the complete recording, but Deutsche Grammophon used the shorter LP version.
Also in 1941, Ernest Chappell narrated A Christmas Carol, "dramatized to a musical background," on an album of four 12-inch records for RCA Victor.
Peter Pan Records released "Charles Dickens: A Christmas Carol" which features a studio recording.
In 1960, Dan O'Herlihy recorded the complete Dickens novel on a set of 4 16-RPM LP's, one of the few instances that this speed was used for a professional recording. This version was one of the first audiobooks ever made, and is now available on CD. It was originally released on LP by a company called Audio Book Records, perhaps the first use of that term ever coined.
Ralph Richardson as Scrooge and Paul Scofield as the Narrator were featured on a 1960 Caedmon Records (TC-1145) adaptation of the story.
An Adaptation of Dickens' Christmas Carol (1974) is an audio musical recording with six original musical numbers, featuring various Disney characters playing the Dickens roles. It was adapted (without the songs) into the animated short Mickey's Christmas Carol in 1983.
In 1977, Roy Dotrice recorded a slightly abridged reading for Argo Records (ZSW 584/5) with music as linking for the "staves".
Patrick Stewart has recorded his one-man dramatic reading of the story.
The actor Gerald Charles Dickens, the great-great-grandson of Charles Dickens, has recorded a CD of A Christmas Carol which is unabridged and in which he plays twenty-six characters. His performance is based on Charles Dickens's original reading tour script.


==== 2000–present ====
In 2003, actor Jim Dale released an unabridged reading with full characterisations of all the roles as part of the Random House Listening Library series.
Tom Baker recorded an unabridged reading released in 2012 for the BBC's AudioGo Ltd.
Nottingham broadcaster Steve Oliver recorded an audio book in four 'staves' based on the original public reading script.
Tim Curry narrated an unabridged "Signature Performance" recording for Audible.
Audible released an original audio dramatisation of the novel in 2016, adapted by R.D. Carstairs, featuring Sir Derek Jacobi as Charles Dickens, Kenneth Cranham as Scrooge, Roger Allam as Marley, Brendan Coyle as The Ghost of Christmas Past, Miriam Margolyes as The Ghost of Christmas Present, Tim McInnerny as The Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come, Jamie Glover as Bob Cratchit, Emily Bruni as Mrs. Cratchit, Jenna Coleman as Belle, Joshua James as Young Scrooge, and Hugh Skinner as Fred. (NOTE: This is one of the only two currently-known audio productions in which the Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come actually speaks, the other being a rare 1947 ABC radio version starring Lionel Barrymore.)
In 2025, British authors Peter Darnes and BAFTA Member Leon Mitchell produced an adaptation of the story with a modern soundscape, as part of a series of adaptations. The audiobook was broadcast on BBC Radio East Midlands with Steve Jackson on 17 April 2025, and the adaptation was released to major platforms Apple Books, Barnes & Noble and Spotify.


== Opera ==
Mister Scrooge (1958–1959); alternative name: Shadows (Tiene), an opera by Slovak composer Ján Cikker.
A Christmas Carol (1962), an opera by Edwin Coleman with libretto by Margaret Burns Harris. Broadcast by BBC Television on 24 December 1962, performed by the Pro Arte Orchestra with Stephen Manton and Trevor Anthony. The opera was described by viewers as 'weird', 'modern', 'off-key', with 'not a single tuneful aria of any length'.
A Christmas Carol (1978–1979), an opera by Thea Musgrave.
The Passion of Scrooge (or A Christmas Carol) (1998), a chamber opera by Jon Deak for one baritone and chamber orchestra.
A Christmas Carol (2014), by Iain Bell, libretto by Simon Callow, which premiered at Houston Grand Opera on 5 December 2014, with Heldentenor Jay Hunter Morris and former Houston Grand Opera Studio member Kevin Ray alternating in the single role of the Narrator.
A Christmas Carol (2022), an opera composed by Graeme Koehne and set to a libretto by Anna Goldsworthy. In this adaptation, the story is relocated to present day Melbourne, and features a number of references to Australian culture (such as The Ghost of Christmas Present being portrayed as a surf lifesaver). The opera was produced by Victorian Opera, and ran for four performances at the Palais Theatre in mid-December.


== Ballet ==
A Christmas Carol (1992), a live production performed by Northern Ballet. This adaptation was recorded in 1992 and released on DVD in 2005
A Christmas Carol (1994–present), a production performed annually by The Ulster Ballet Company of Saugerties, New York
John Clifford premiered his new production A CHRISTMAS CAROL: The Ballet, for The Portland Ballet on 27 November 2021
A Christmas Carol, in Finnish Saiturin joulu, by choreographer David Bintley and composer Sally Beamish, premiered at the Finnish National Ballet in December 2023.


== Graphic novels and comic adaptations ==


=== 1948–1999 ===
A Christmas Carol (1948) Classics Illustrated No. 53 US release (Gilberton); No. 15 UK release, adaptation, script by George Lipscomb and drawn by Henry C. Kiefer
A Christmas Carol (1951) Dell Giant – A Christmas Treasury No. 1 (Dell Comics), drawn by Mike Sekowsky
The TT's Swingin' Christmas Carol (1966) The Teen Titans No. 13 (DC comics). The Titans use their powers to recreate the story of a Christmas Carol to try and redeem Mister Ebenezer Scrounge.
A Christmas Carol (1978) Marvel Classics Comics No. 36 adaptation, drawn by Diverse Hands, script by Doug Moench
A Christmas Carol (1985) The Outsiders No. 5 (DC Comics). The Outsiders try a Christmas Carol operation on Eben Mudge, a man who was forced into being a mob account 40 years ago, to try to get him to turn state's evidence.
A Christmas Carol (1990) Classics Illustrated No. 16 (First Comics) adapted by Joe Staton
Sonic's Christmas Carol (1993). A backup story featured in Archie Comics' Sonic the Hedgehog No. 6. It casts Dr. Robotnik as Scrooge, Rotor Walrus as Bob Cratchit, Snively as Jacob Marley and Sonic as all three ghosts.


=== 2000–present ===
Christmas Carol (2004), drawn by Dick Matena (ISBN 978-90-234-1643-2)
A Christmas Carol (2007) Saddleback Educational Publishing ISBN 978-1-56254-890-2
A Christmas Carol: The Graphic Novel (2008), by Sean Michael Wilson and Mike Collins (ISBN 978-1-906332-51-8). The graphic novel was chosen as one of the Top Ten Graphic Novels of the year by The Sunday Times.
A Christmas Carol (2010) Campfire Classics graphic novel adaptation ISBN 978-81-907326-8-0
Adaptation by Alex Burrows included in Christmas Classics: Graphic Classics Volume Nineteen (2010)
Batman: Noël (2011), a graphic novel written and illustrated by Lee Bermejo, featuring a tale with the Caped Crusader inspired by A Christmas Carol. (ISBN 978-1-4012-3213-9)
Zombies Christmas Carol (2011), an adaptation of the original story by Marvel Comics with zombies as a metaphor for the hungry and needy, the source of the plague being Scrooge's own hatred and bitterness towards man.
A Christmas Carol (2012) Stephen L. Stern and artist Douglas A. Siroisin a full-color adaptation of the story.
A Christmas Carol Starring Scrooge McDuck (2019) based on the Disney version, adapted by Guido Martina with art by Jose Colomer Fonts. Cover drawn by Giovan Carpi.
A story arc in the comic strip FoxTrot (2019) has Jason dreaming that he is Ebenezer Scrooge, with his friends and family members playing the other roles.


== Parody adaptations ==


=== 1978–1999 ===
Rich Little's Christmas Carol (1978) Premiered on CBC with Rich Little playing each celebrity character.
Kenny Everett's Christmas Carol (1985), a Christmas special episode of his BBC series with many famous cameos.
Blackadder's Christmas Carol (1988), in which the central character, Ebenezer Blackadder (Rowan Atkinson), is initially kind and generous, but after being visited by the Spirit of Christmas (Robbie Coltrane), becomes greedy, insulting and mean.
Beavis and Butt-head, (1995) "Huh-Huh-Humbug", an episode with Beavis as Scrooge.
The Haunted Tea-Cosy: A Dispirited and Distasteful Diversion for Christmas (1998) by Edward Gorey (1998), in his typical surreal style.


=== 2000–2009 ===
I'm Sorry I Haven't a Christmas Carol (2003), a Christmas special for the BBC Radio 4 panel game I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue, with central character Ebenezer Scrumph (Humphrey Lyttelton) and assistant Colin Crotchet (Colin Sell).
Karroll's Christmas (2004), The Scrooge character, Zebidiah Rosecog (Wallace Shawn) is the neighbor of Allen Karroll (Tom Everett Scott), who is visited by the three ghosts instead due to a mistake in address.
An American Carol (2008), Presented from a conservative-leaning perspective, the film is a parody of liberal filmmaker Michael Moore as well as his editorial documentaries that satirise Hollywood and American culture. It uses the framework of Charles Dickens' 1843 novella A Christmas Carol, but moves the setting of the story from Christmas to Independence Day.
A Christmas Chuckle (2009), a family comedy show written by and starring The Chuckle Brothers which toured Britain in November and December 2009.
In the Bleak Expectations series 3 episode "A Now Grim Life Yet More Grimified" (2009), Pip Bin is visited during Harvest Festival by the Ghost of Harvest Festival after torture by his nemesis Mr Gently Benevolent resulted in him becoming a reclusive miser. However, it is revealed that this was a theatrics-based con by Benevolent, himself playing the Ghost, to trick Pip into giving him his fortune.


=== 2010–present ===
All American Christmas Carol (2013), An impoverished mother is visited by three ghosts intent on showing her a path to a brighter future. Starring Taryn Manning, Beverly D'Angelo, Wendi McLendon-Covey, Meat Loaf, Eric Roberts, and Lin Shaye.
A Christmas Boner in 2013 by Conor Lastowka, a rewrite of A Christmas Carol in which Scrooge has priapism throughout. This was in the vein of other parody mashups like Pride and Prejudice and Zombies.
Epic Rap Battles of History (2013) episode "Donald Trump vs. Ebenezer Scrooge" features Ebenezer Scrooge rap battling Donald Trump (representing Jacob Marley), J.P. Morgan (representing the Ghost of Christmas Past), Kanye West (representing the Ghost of Christmas Present), and the Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come (represented in traditional form).
Soylent Scrooge, (2017) a radio parody inspired by A Modest Proposal and the film Soylent Green in which Scrooge and Marley own a factory that converts the poor into foodstuffs. Other Dickens characters also appear in the story and fake commercials.
Q Brothers Christmas Carol (2018), a hip-hop parody of Christmas Carol, produced by the Q Brothers (JQ and GQ), performed at the Chicago Shakespeare Theater.
Canadian comedy actor Don Harron recorded a version as "Charlie Farquharson" using malaprops.
Turn of the Scrooge, a parody sequel wherein Marley faked his death and conspired with Bob Cratchit and Tim, himself a child-faced gangster, to steal Scrooge's fortune on Christmas Eve, and attempt to successfully repeat their performance the following year.
A VHS Christmas Carol: Live! (2021), A 1980s inspired Christmas Carol musical parody, performed by StarKid Productions. The musical was written by Clark Baxtresser and directed by Corey Lubowich. It ran successfully for three nights (9–11 December) at the Bourbon Room Theater in Hollywood, California.
A Christmas Karen (2022), a comedy based on the internet meme.
A Christmas Carol (ish) (2022), a comedy re-telling by Nick Mohammed (as Mr Swallow), opened at Soho Theatre in December 2022, prior to a West End transfer at @sohoplace in November 2024.


== Derivative works ==
The basic plot of A Christmas Carol has been put to a variety of different literary and dramatic uses since Dickens's death, alongside sequels, prequels, and stories focusing on minor characters.


=== Derivative film adaptations ===


==== 1900s ====

My Little Boy (1917), a composite of A Christmas Carol and Little Boy Blue.
The Strange Christmas Dinner (1949), a modern adaption that sets the play in a New York restaurant.
It's Never Too Late (1953), Italian adaptation of Dickens's novel, featuring Paolo Stoppa and Marcello Mastroianni.
The Passions of Carol (1975), starring Mary Stuart as Carol Screwge and Marc Stevens as Marley. A pornographic adaptation.
Scrooged (1988), a modern retelling that follows Bill Murray as Frank Cross, a cynical and selfish television executive who produces a live Christmas Eve show. The film also stars Karen Allen, John Forsythe, Bobcat Goldthwait, Carol Kane, Robert Mitchum, Michael J. Pollard and Alfre Woodard.


==== 2000–present ====
Surviving Christmas (2004), a romantic comedy about a wealthy advertising executive who hires a suburban family to be his pretend family. The film ends with the main characters seeing a community theatre production of A Christmas Carol. Earlier in the film, the executive also hires the actor who plays Scrooge in the production to be his pretend grandfather.
A Dennis the Menace Christmas (2007), Mr. Wilson is shown by an angel his past, the present, and the possible future if he does not change his ways.
Ghosts of Girlfriends Past (2009), a romantic comedy film starring Matthew McConaughey as the Scrooge-like character "Connor Mead".
Scrooge & Marley (2012), a gay film adaptation featuring David Pevsner as Ebenezer "Ben" Scrooge
Mister Scrooge to See You (2013) One year after the conclusion of the story, Ebenezer Scrooge finds himself on a new journey. Once again he is visited by Jacob Marley. This time Scrooge is sent on an adventure which takes him into the life of Timothy Cratchit the VI, the great-great-great-grandson of Bob Cratchit.
My Dad Is Scrooge (2014), a fantasy film about talking animals using the novella to help a Scrooge-like father (played by Brian Cook) see the error of his ways.
The Man Who Invented Christmas (2017), a film about Charles Dickens' struggle to write the book while dealing with his personal life with his characters, especially Ebenezer Scrooge (played by Christopher Plummer), seeming to haunt him with their opinions.
A Christmas Carol (2018), a contemporary retelling of the story set in Scotland, featuring Stuart Brennan as distillery-owner Scrooge, Bonnie Wright as Nell and Sarina Taylor as a female Bob Cratchit. Digital online release.
A Christmas Carol (2020), a British Christmas drama dance film directed by Jacqui Morris and David Morris.
Marley (TBA), an upcoming musical film by Walt Disney Pictures, which will adapt A Christmas Carol through Jacob Marley's perspective. Bill Condon will write and direct the film.


=== Derivative television movie adaptations ===


==== 1957–1999 ====
The Trail to Christmas (1957), a Western adaption of the play directed by James Stewart.
Rod Serling's A Carol for Another Christmas (1964) was a United Nations special sponsored by Xerox, with Sterling Hayden as Scrooge character Daniel Grudge.
An American Christmas Carol (1979), an adaptation starring Henry Winkler. Set in Depression era New England, the Scrooge character is named Benedict Slade.
Skinflint: A Country Christmas Carol (1979), an American country music-inspired TV film starring Hoyt Axton as Cyrus Flint.
Scrooge's Rock 'N' Roll Christmas (1984), starring Jack Elam as Scrooge.
John Grin's Christmas (1986), an African-American adaptation produced, directed by and starring Robert Guillaume.
Scrooged (1988), a comedy film starring Bill Murray as a Scrooge-like regional boss of a TV station set to direct a Scrooge musical.
Ebbie (1995), a TV movie with the first female portrayal of Scrooge, starring Susan Lucci as Elizabeth "Ebbie" Scrooge, owner of a huge department store, and some of her own employees doubling as the three Christmas Spirits.
Ebenezer (1997), a Western version produced for Canadian TV, starring Jack Palance as land baron Ebenezer Scrooge.
Ms. Scrooge (1997), a TV movie starring Cicely Tyson as "Ebenita Scrooge", the managing director of a loan company, and Katherine Helmond as her deceased business partner Maude Marley.
The Ghosts of Dickens' Past (1998), a mysterious girl (Jennifer Bertram) inspires Charles Dickens (Christopher Heyerdahl) to encourage charity and discourage child labour by writing A Christmas Carol.


==== 2000–2019 ====
A Christmas Carol (2000), A TV-movie that takes place in the present where Ross Kemp plays Eddie Scrooge, a London loan shark. Jacob Marley (Ray Fearon) not only warns Scrooge of the three impending spirits, but doubles as the Ghost of Christmas Present.
A Diva's Christmas Carol (2000), TV movie that premiered on VH1, now on Lifetime, with Vanessa Williams in the Scrooge role as "Ebony" Scrooge, one third of a late-'80's pop trio called "Desire" and now an egotistical, arrogant, grouchy solo diva.
Scrooge & Marley (2001), a Christian-themed television film adaptation set in a fictional New England town called Winterset, Connecticut. It was directed by Fred Holmes and produced by the Coral Ridge Ministries, starring Dean Jones as Ebenezer Scrooge, who in this adaptation starts out as an atheist and a personal injury lawyer. Also adapted from the book What If Jesus Had Never Been Born? In the United States, the film aired on Trinity Broadcasting Network on 21 December 2001 and then 25 December; it also aired on syndicated stations on 24–25 December and then as part of The Coral Ridge Hour on 29–30 December and has since aired on TBN and other syndicated stations in subsequent years.
A Carol Christmas (2003), another TV movie portraying Scrooge as an arrogant female celebrity, this time a TV talk show host named "Carol Cartman", played by Tori Spelling. Also featured were Dinah Manoff as Marla, Carol's stage mother-type aunt, Gary Coleman as the Ghost of Christmas Past, William Shatner as the Ghost of Christmas Present and an uncredited James Cromwell as the Ghost of Christmas Future.
Chasing Christmas (2005), TV film with the Ghost of Christmas Past (Leslie Jordan) going AWOL, leaving the 'Scrooge' of this story (Tom Arnold) stuck in 1965.
Christmas Cupid (2010), made-for-TV movie starring Christina Milian as the Scrooge-inspired character "Sloane Spencer".
It's Christmas, Carol! (2012), a made-for-TV movie starring Emmanuelle Vaugier as an arrogant Chicago-based book publisher; her former boss, Eve (Carrie Fisher) approaches her on Christmas Eve and functions as all three spirits, Past, Present and Yet To Come.


==== 2020–present ====
A Nashville Christmas Carol (2020), a made-for-TV movie starring Jessy Schram as the producer of a Christmas TV special who has become so devoted to her work that she has shut out emotional contact with people; her late former boss and mentor (Wynonna Judd) appears to her and with the help of Christmas Past and Present shows her parts of her past she never knew and how they affected her present. The story is very loosely based on Dickens's work and The Ghost of Christmas Yet-To-Come is not part of this story.
Boyfriends of Christmas Past (2021), a made-for-TV film written by Edie Grace and Lisa Parson and directed by Don McBrearty, with Catherine Haena Kim as Lauren Kim, who is visited by the ghosts of four ex-boyfriends to teach her how to open her heart or risk losing her best male friend.
A Dickens of a Holiday! (2021), a made-for-TV movie produced by the Hallmark Channel and starring Brooke D'Orsay as Cassie, a theatre director working on a community production of A Christmas Carol to celebrate the 100th anniversary of Dickens Day, an annual festival held in the fictional town of Dickens, Ohio.
Christmas Carole (2022), a made-for-television comedy written by Anil Gupta and Richard Pinto, and starring Suranne Jones as a Scrooge-like entrepreneur named Carole Mackay, with the three ghosts represented by Morecambe and Wise (played by actors Jonty Stephens and Ian Ashpitel), Jo Brand and Nish Kumar.


=== Derivative TV series episodes ===


==== 1953–1980 ====
Topper (1953); Henrietta reads "A Christmas Carol" to Topper and their guests. Topper falls asleep during the reading and dreams he is Scrooge.
Bewitched (1967); in the episode "Humbug not be Spoken Here". Samantha takes a miserly client of Darrin's to the North Pole on Christmas Eve to meet Santa Claus.
The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour (1967); the episode aired on 24 December 1967 included an 18-minute parody sketch in which Tommy Smothers plays Ebenezer Scrooge III and Jack Benny plays Bob Cratchit.
The Odd Couple (1970); in the episode "Scrooge Gets an Oscar", Felix and the other poker players become Dickens characters in a dream after Oscar refuses to be Scrooge in a children's play.
Omnibus (1973), UK; "A Christmas Carol", a Dickens favourite as interpreted by mime artist Marcel Marceau.
Little House on the Prairie (1975); in an episode that serves as a twist on the Dickens story, actor Ted Gehring plays "Ebenezer Sprague", a Scrooge-type self-centered and miserly banker who refuses to give and receive until a near-falling out with the Ingalls family over a loan (an analogue for the three Christmas ghosts) changes his ways.
Sanford and Son (1975); in the episode "Ebenezer Sanford", tightfisted Fred gets a ghostly wake-up call in this spoof of "A Christmas Carol."
The Six Million Dollar Man (1976); in "A Bionic Christmas Carol", Steve Austin uses his bionic abilities to make an old miser change his ways.
WKRP in Cincinnati (1980); in the episode "Bah Humbug", Mr. Carlson plans to give the staffers no Christmas bonuses. But after eating one of Johnny Fever's "special" brownies, the ghosts of Christmas Past (Jennifer), Present (Venus) and Future (Johnny) visit him to show him the error of his ways.


==== 1981–1999 ====
Alice (1981); in the episode "Mel's Christmas Carol", Mel Sharples is haunted by a former business partner Jake, after he fires the waitresses from his diner on Christmas Eve.
Family Ties (1983); in the episode "A Keaton Christmas Carol", Alex finds the spirit of Christmas in a dream when he is shown visions of the past and future by ghosts of Mallory and Jennifer.
Highway to Heaven (1984); in the episode "Another Song For Christmas", Jonathan and Mark become involved in their own version of Dickens's classic "Christmas Carol", involving a heartless used car salesman. Directed by Michael Landon.
Fame: (1985); in the episode "Ebenezer Morloch", Mr. Morloch falls asleep and is visited by three ghosts.
George Burns Comedy Week: "A Christmas Carol II" (1985), an episode in which Scrooge is good-natured to a fault and all of Camden Town takes advantage of his generosity to the point of taking all his money. This prompts the spirits to return and make sure Scrooge achieves a balance between his past and current behavior.
Doctor Who – The Trial of a Time Lord (1986) – when the Doctor is put on trial by his own race, the Time Lords, they see evidence from the Doctor's past, present and future.
Beverly Hills Teens: (1987); In "Miracle at the Teen Club – Part 1" The teens envision themselves as the players in a Christmas Carol allegory while snowbound during Buck Huckster's Christmas Eve Party.
A Different World (1989); in the episode "For Whom the Jingle Bell Tolls", Whitley plays the Scrooge role over her mother's plans to visit the French Riviera for Christmas. She receives visits from the ghosts of Christmas Past (Mr. Gaines), Present (Walter) and Future (Jaleesa).
Mr. Belvedere (1989) in the episode "A Happy Guys Christmas" The Happy Guys of Pittsburgh are putting on their annual Christmas play and have decided on "A Christmas Carol". The entire Owens family is cast, but when Mr. Belvdere gets frustrated with the poor directing, he takes over the job, only to quit in a huff. This leads to Mr. Belvedere being visited by the Ghost of Christmas Past, Present and Future.
Star Trek: The Next Generation (1991): "Devil's Due": Data plays Ebenezer Scrooge in a theatre performance.
Martin (1996); in the episode "Scrooge", Martin is visited by three Christmas spirits to encourage Martin's Christmas spirit and the joy of giving.


==== 2000–present ====
I Was a Sixth Grade Alien (2000); in "A Very Buttsman Christmas", Ms. Buttsman is in charge at the embassy and planning on cancelling Christmas. This upsets Pleskit and Tim very much, especially because it would be Pleskit's first. As Ms. Buttsman drifts off into a deep sleep, she is visited by the ghost of Christmas Present, Past and Future.
Nan's Christmas Carol (2009) is a spin-off of The Catherine Tate Show. The one-off special, based on Dickens's novella, is about Nan visited by three ghosts on Christmas night in her council flat.
A Christmas Carol – the 2010 Christmas special episode of Doctor Who borrows elements from Dickens's novel, as the Eleventh Doctor attempts to make a miserly man who could save a crashing ship change his ways by influencing the man's past, culminating in him bringing the man's child-self into the future. Dialogue acknowledges the source, and Dickens himself has appeared as a character in two unrelated episodes.
It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia (2010); in the episode "A Very Sunny Christmas," Dee and Dennis blame Frank for ruining their childhood Christmases, and try to teach him a lesson by staging a haunting by Frank's former business partner, whom Frank believes is dead.
Suite Life on Deck (2010) A London Carol: London is too selfish to give anything for homeless and sick children during Christmas when Cody and Bailey asked for donations for needy children. On Christmas Eve night, London's mirror takes her back to the past, the present and future to learn her lesson.
Kelly Clarkson's Cautionary Christmas Music Tale (2013), an NBC television special loosely based on A Christmas Carol featuring Kelly Clarkson playing a Scrooge-like role.
Classic Alice, a 2014–2015 web-series re-imagining with Alice playing Scrooge as she leads herself through the ghosts of past, present, and future to discover what she really wants.
In the Upstart Crow 2018 Christmas special, A Crow Christmas Carol, William Shakespeare (played by David Mitchell) is told the story of A Christmas Carol by a mysterious stranger (played by Kenneth Branagh). Will then uses the premise to try and make the miserly Sir Robert Greene (played by Mark Heap) to become a better person, after which he allows 'some future author' to write the story instead as a gift.
In the 2019 General Hospital episode "General Hospital's Christmas Carol", actors from the soap opera portray the characters from Dickens novella. Actor Michael Easton portrays Scrooge.
Staged (2022); in the episode "Knock, Knock", David and Michael perform an improvised adaptation of A Christmas Carol during a livestream.


=== Derivative animated adaptations ===


==== 1950s–1999 ====
Gumby (1957) "Scrooge Loose" A Gumby Christmas Carol in which Gumby plays Sherlock Holmes to find and capture Ebenezer Scrooge, who has escaped out of the book by Charles Dickens and who is bent on ruining Christmas! Scrooge has walked into a book on Santa Claus stories, and he is replacing the presents with rocks on Christmas Eve. It's up to Gumby and Pokey (whom Gumby calls "Dr. Watson") to capture the humbuggish Scrooge and put a stop to his antics.
Bugs Bunny's Christmas Carol (1979) The cartoon is an adaptation of the Dickens novella, featuring Yosemite Sam as Ebenezer Scrooge, Porky Pig as Bob Cratchit and Bugs Bunny as Jacob Marley and Fred. Scrooge's dream-journey into his past, present, and future is omitted; instead, Bugs dresses up as a white-robed emissary of Hades to scare Scrooge straight.
The Dukes (1983) "A Dickens of a Christmas" in this episode of the animated version of The Dukes of Hazzard, Boss Hogg has a Scrooge like experience.
The Jetsons "A Jetson Christmas Carol" (1985) Spacely orders George to work overtime on Christmas Eve while Astro causes himself to be sick. Three spirits visit Spacely to convince him that Christmas is a time of giving.
The Real Ghostbusters (1986) In the episode "X-Mas Marks the Spot", on Christmas Eve Peter Venkman, Ray Stanz, Egon Spangler, and Winston Zeddmore end up traveling back in time to 1837 England, where they unknowingly meet Scrooge and end up "busting" the Three Christmas Ghosts by accident. It is revealed that Peter's childhood was very similar to Scrooge's.
Beverly Hills Teens (1987) "Miracle at The Teenclub parts I & II", The teens envision themselves as the players in a Christmas Carol allegory while snowbound during Buck Huckster's Christmas Eve Party
Bravestarr "Tex's Terrible Night," (1987) The series' villain, Tex Hex, fills the Scrooge role while the Shaman helps him to see the error of his ways, temporarily.
Camp Candy (1989) In the episode "Christmas in July" During a summer heat wave, the Camp Candy gang cools things off by staging a make-believe "Christmas in July." But when crabby Vanessa says "Bah humbug!" to their plan, the campers teach her about true holiday spirit with a goofy Camp Candy version of Charles Dickens's classic "A Christmas Carol."
The Chipmunks (1989) "Merry Christmas, Mr. Carroll" an episode of "The Chipmunks" in which Alvin is scrooge like and experiences the three spirits.
Animaniacs (1993) "A Christmas Plotz", a Warner version of A Christmas Carol, with the Warners as the three spirits, Slappy Squirrel as Jacob Marley and Thaddeus Plotz as Ebenezer Scrooge.
Avenger Penguins, UK (1994) "A Christmas Carol" Charles Dickens's novella is parodied in this episode. Doom realises he must restore power to the city after he blacks it out.
101 Dalmatians: The Series (1997) "A Christmas Cruella" An adaptation of Dickens's novella with Cruella in the role of Scrooge, Jasper and Horace as Marley, Cadpig as the ghost of Christmas Past, Rolly as the ghost of Christmas Present, and Spot as the ghost of Christmas Yet To Come.
An All Dogs Christmas Carol (1998), animated TV movie based on All Dogs Go to Heaven and featuring the villainous Carface as this version's Scrooge.
Arthur (1999) "Prunella Gets It Twice" Prunella gets two dolls for her birthday and dismisses the second one, which is from Francine. Later, Prunella believes that Francine spoiled the party by not joining in on the festivities. That night, Prunella has a dream where the Ghost of Presents Past takes her through time to clear things up, showing her how far Francine went to get the doll. In the end, Prunella realises that Francine's attitude was caused by Prunella's lack of appreciation for the present.


==== 2000–2010 ====
Adventures from the Book of Virtues (2000) An adaptation of A Christmas Carol with Annie in the role of Scrooge, Zack in the role of Bob Cratchit, Plato in the role of Jacob Marley, Aristotle in the role of the Ghost of Christmas Past, Socrates in the role of the Ghost of Christmas Present, Aurora in the role of the Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come, and an unnamed blond orphan boy in the role of Tiny Tim.
Maxine's Christmas Carol (2000) In this modernised (Y2K), animated adaptation of Charles Dickens's novel A Christmas Carol, Hallmark Card comic character Maxine is Scrooge.
Pepper Ann (2000) "A Valentine's Day Tune" In this Valentine's Day spin on "A Christmas Carol", Pepper Ann is visited by the ghosts of her past, present, and future to see why she hates Valentine's Day, what others think about her hatred of the holiday, and what will happen if she does not change her ways.
Aqua Teen Hunger Force (2002) "Cybernetic Ghost of Christmas Past from the Future" starts out as a Christmas Carol parody, with the eponymous time-traveling cybernetic spectre showing Carl a Christmas Day from his childhood, before the memory is interrupted by a robot war (which he does not remember because back then it was only a prophecy)
The Simpsons (2003) "'Tis the Fifteenth Season" After watching Mr. McGrew's Christmas Carol, Homer mends his selfish ways and becomes the nicest guy in town, making Ned Flanders jealous.
Veggie Tales: "An Easter Carol" (2004), a direct-to-video adaption which is similar, but is themed around Easter instead of Christmas.
A Christmas Carol: Scrooge's Ghostly Tale (2006), animated. This version casts the famous Dickens characters as anthropomorphic animals.
American Dad! (2006) "The Best Christmas Story Never Told" With Stan's Christmas spirit at an all-time low (thanks to special interest groups trying to make the holiday season more politically correct), the Ghost of Christmas Past visits him and tries to show him the true meaning of Christmas by taking him to 1970. However, Stan is convinced that Christmas can be saved by killing Jane Fonda.
Bah, Humduck! A Looney Tunes Christmas (2006) the second Looney Tunes adaptation; this time in modern times featuring Daffy Duck as Scrooge.
Kappa Mikey (2006) "A Christmas Mikey", in which Ozu fills the Scrooge role and is visited by the Ghosts of Japanese Christmas. In this case, Ozu is only shown his past, and when the Present Ghost shows up, the Past Ghost explains Ozu's sad backstory and the three decide to ruin Christmas until the Future Ghost appears and sets them straight.
Wayside (2007) "Wayside Christmas", When Myron does not give Bebe a Secret Santa gift, a series of haphazard events confuse Myron into thinking he s actually stuck in his own version of A Christmas Carol . The other kids, including Todd, Dana and Maurecia, are baffled as he mistakes them for Ghosts of Christmas Past, Present, and Future, and in the end, Myron learns his lesson.
Barbie in a Christmas Carol (2008), Barbie stars as a female version of Scrooge.
Dora's Christmas Carol Adventure (2009) Despite warnings, Swiper misbehaves and lands on Santa's naughty list. Thanks to pleas from Dora, Swiper gets a chance to redeem himself: he must learn the true meaning of Christmas by finding four missing ornaments, located in the past and the future.


==== 2011–present ====
The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange "Orange Carol" (2012), an episode where Orange's annoying antics are spoiling everyone's holiday cheer, then a visit from three ghosts appeared and try to make Orange learn about the holiday spirit.
The Looney Tunes Show, "A Christmas Carol" (2012), the episode features a stage adaptation of the tale written by Lola, only without going by the book due to the character of Scrooge. It's currently unclear if she had read the book Bugs gave her or not.
Jake and the Never Land Pirates (2014): "Captain Scrooge" In this variation of Charles Dickens's A Christmas Carol, Captain Treasure Tooth visits Captain Scrooge (Captain Hook) and takes him through time.
My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic includes a 2016 episode, A Hearth's Warming Tail featuring an in-universe adaption. In the episode, during the annual celebration of Hearth's Warming (the Equestrian version of Christmas), Twilight Sparkle tells Starlight Glimmer a story to get her into the spirit of the season. The story features Snowfall Frost (portrayed by Starlight Glimmer) as the story's version of Scrooge.
Thomas & Friends (2016): "Diesel's Ghostly Christmas", a special double-length episode from Series 19; a loose adaptation of the story with Diesel playing the role of Scrooge.
Be Cool, Scooby-Doo! episode "Scroogey Doo" (2017) The gang travels to nineteenth-century Britain and runs into Scrooge who claims he was attacked by the ghost of his partner Jacob Marley and that three more ghosts are coming. The gang agrees to solve the mystery, but Velma wonders if she has more potential than just solving mysteries.
Family Guy (2017) "Don't Be A Dickens at Christmas" Peter takes a journey around Quahog with the ghost of Patrick Swayze after he loses his Christmas spirit.
The Powerpuff Girls (2017) "You're A Good Man, Mojo Jojo!" After terrorising Townsville during the holidays, Mojo Jojo is visited that night by three ghosts resembling the Powerpuff Girls who try to make him change his ways.
Ducktales, (2018) with David Tennant as Scrooge McDuck in the episode "Last Christmas!"
The Loud House (2020) "A Flipmas Carol", A Scrooge-like Flip is visited by three ghosts in a special take on A Christmas Carol.


=== Derivative theatre adaptations ===


==== 1990s–1999 ====
The Marley Carol (1993), a Christmas Play in Two Acts by Dennis Drake, taking place on the Christmas Eve that Jacob Marley gives up the ghost.
Jacob Marley's Christmas Carol (1994), a play based on the book by Tom Mula (see below on "Literature") focusing on Jacob Marley and his attempts to redeem Scrooge lest he face eternal torment.[86]
Tiny Tim is Dead (1998), a play by Barbara Lebow that uses A Christmas Carol as a theme within the work. A group of homeless people attempt to re-enact the story but find themselves torn apart, leaving no hope for the future.


==== 2000–2010 ====
Mrs. Bob Cratchit's Wild Christmas Binge (2002) is a musical parody of the Charles Dickens story A Christmas Carol. Written by Christopher Durang, the play was initially commissioned by City Theatre in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, when Durang was asked by Artistic Director Tracy Brigden to write a Christmas comedy. It premiered on 7 November 2002 at the City Theatre, with Kristine Nielsen in the title role. This parody was revived in 2012 with additional performances in 2013
Marley's Ghost (2003) by Jeff Goode is a stage play which is a prequel along similar lines to the novel by Osmun (see below in "Literature").
The Last Christmas of Ebenezer Scrooge: The Sequel to A Christmas Carol (Wildside Press, 2003) by Marvin Kaye. This sequel picks up where the original left off, with Scrooge trying to right an unresolved wrong; adapted for the stage.
A Klingon Christmas Carol (written c. 2006) is an adaptation set on the Klingon homeworld of Qo'noS in the Star Trek fictional universe. The play was co-written and directed by Christopher O. Kidder, and was performed from 2007–2010 by Commedia Beauregard, (a Saint Paul, Minnesota, theatre company), and also presented in Chicago for 2010.
The Trial of Ebenezer Scrooge (2007), a comedic play where, one year after the events of the original story, Scrooge sues Marley and the Spirits for kidnapping and emotional distress.
An American Country Christmas Carol (2010), a new musical adaptation with book and lyrics by Scott Logsdon and music by Rand Bishop, Kent Blazy, Roxie Dean, Tim Finn, Billy Kirsch, J. Fred Knobloch, and Pam Rose. It was presented as a staged reading at the Boiler Room Theatre in Franklin, Tennessee, on 5, 6, and 13 December 2010.
Ebenezer Ever After, 2010, musical adapted by Dan Flowers and Fred Walton from Flowers's novel The Spirit of the Season (see below in "Literature"); premiered in Portland, Oregon in 2010.


==== 2011–2019 ====
A Christmas Carol (2013–present) an annual production written by Kevin Moriarty for Dallas Theater Center. In this adaptation, Scrooge is changed from a money lender in London's business district to the owner of a factory in the industrialised Midlands.
An American Christmas Carol (2014), a ballet that relocates the story to post World War II America. Produced by Ballet Fantastique, the score included the music of Frank Sinatra, Ella Fitzgerald and Nat King Cole, and was performed by Jazz singer Halie Loren. A filmed version of the ballet was released in 2020.
Scrooge's Long Night (2014), a comedic, family-friendly take on the story with audience participation and 4 actors playing 12 roles.
Charles Dickens Writes A Christmas Carol (2015), an adaptation by Richard Quesnel, by Lost and Found Theater inc, at The Conrad Center for the Performing Arts in Kitchener, Canada. This adaptation tells the story of how A Christmas Carol came to be written, as well as the story of A Christmas Carol.
Scrooge in Love! (2015) One year after the novella, Scrooge's life takes a turn as the romantic—new ghosts (and Jacob Marley) arrive to help him find his lost love Belle. This was produced for the first time in 2015 in San Francisco.
A Dickensian Christmas (2016), a staged lecture and reading produced by Andrew McKinnon exploring the story behind A Christmas Carol. The show was presented by Tama Matheson, and featured carols performed by Tahu Matheson, Teddy Tahu Rhodes, and the Australian Youth Choir. It was presented as one-night only events at the Melbourne Recital Centre and Sydney's City Recital Hall.
Scrooge in Love! (2016), a musical written by Duane Poole (music by Larry Grossman and lyrics by Kellan Blair) in which Ebenezer Scrooge, rather than being miserly, sees money as a cure-all and takes generosity overboard.
Solstice Song: A Christmas Carol for the 21st Century (2016) by Deirdre Duffy. A re-imagining of Dickens's classic, set in Washington DC on Winter Solstice 2012, in which Andrew Blossom (the "Scrooge"), a widowed defense contractor, is visited by his deceased wife Lydia (the "Marley") and by the ghosts of conspiracy theory past (CV Groves/SS Californian), present (John F Kennedy/South Tower, morning of 11 September), and future (the Falling Man/worldwide ecological catastrophe), who seek to help Blossom come to terms with the loss of his son on 11 September and the power he holds as a survivor. Produced as an enhanced audio drama in 2020.
A Christmas Carol (2017), a new adaptation by Deborah McAndrew, directed by Amy Leach for Hull Truck Theatre. This production transferred to the Leeds Playhouse for Christmas 2018, then it returned during the Christmas 2020 season. This version relocates the story to the North of Victorian, England.
In January 2019, Winchester (UK) based theatre company Blue Apple Theatre staged a re-working of the story with an actress with Down syndrome, Katy Francis, in the leading part of 'Emilina' Scrooge. The show was performed at Theatre Royal Winchester.
An Actors Carol (2019), a comedic adaptation by Charles Evered, telling the story of a burned out actor who has played the character of Scrooge one too many times, has a nervous breakdown and is visited by three ghosts of his own. Written for as few as four actors. First premiered in California in 2015, starring Tony winning actor Hal Linden. Published in 2019 by Broadway Play Publishing, Inc.
A Christmas Carol (2019–present), an adaptation written by David van Belle for Citadel Theatre. The adaptation relocates the story to post-war America, where Scrooge is the owner of a department store.
A Christmas Carol (2019), performed in the Royal Lyceum Theatre in Edinburgh, relocates the play to Edinburgh, with a notable change to the plot being the addition of Greyfriars Bobby.
Dolly Parton's Smoky Mountain Christmas Carol (2019); stage musical with music and lyrics by Dolly Parton and book by David H. Bell, set during the 1930s in the Smoky Mountains of East Tennessee, this production imagines Ebenezer Scrooge as the owner of a mining company town. Performed at Boston's Emerson Colonial Theatre in 2019, also Stanley Industrial Alliance Stage in 2021 and the Southbank Centre in 2022.


==== 2020–present ====
A Christmas Carol (2020), a film adaptation by David and Jacqui Morris. A grandmother narrates the story to her children as the children prepare a toy theatre for their annual performance of A Christmas Carol. Simon Russell Beale is the voice of Scrooge.
A Christmas Carol Live (2020), a filmed version of Jefferson Mays' one man show adaptation of the story. The show was filmed at United Palace in New York and later released for a limited time on the streaming site On The Stage.
A Calico Christmas Carol (2023-present), a 40-minute melodrama created for the Knott's Berry Farm theme park, relocating the story to the Scrooge & Marley Railroad Co. in late 19th century Calico, California.
Filthy Lucre: A Burlesque Christmas Carol (2023–present), a reimagining by Jonny Porkpie retaining much of Dickens' original text, which reveals "Ebeneza" Scrooge's business to be a Gentleman's Club that has foresworn the "Art of Striptease". Revived from Pinchbottom Burlesque's original 2009 production at Walkerspace in Soho Rep, the "risqué burlesque-theater adaptation" was presented in 2023 at the Laurie Beechman Theater, and in 2024 at Drag Club Lips NYC starring Scout Durwood as Scrooge, Tigger! as Jacob Marley, and Jo Weldon as the Ghost of Classic Burlesque.
A Very Jewish Christmas Carol (2023), a comedic play written by Elise Esther Hearst and Phillip Kavanagh, and produced by Melbourne Theatre Company. This adaptation relocates the story to present day Melbourne, and takes place during Chrismukkah. The play blends elements of the original Dickens story with contemporary Christmas culture and Jewish folklore, such as having the three ghosts represented by a Rein-Dybbuk, a Gingerbread Golem, and Lilith Claus
Bogan Literature Presents: A Christmas Carol (2024), a comedic adaptation written by Dean Lovatt and first performed at Subiaco Arts Centre. This version relocates the story to present-day Perth, and sends up Australian bogan culture.


=== Derivative radio adaptations ===
On 24 December 1959, The BBC Home Service broadcast the first episode of series 10 of The Goon Show, titled "A Christmas Carol", starring Spike Milligan, Peter Sellers and Harry Secombe.
On 9 April 1980, the Mutual Radio Theater broadcast a radio play entitled "The Last of Scrooge", starring Vincent Price as the Narrator and Hans Conried as Scrooge, relating the events occurring after Scrooge's reformation that eventually brought the old man to an unhappy and miserable end.
Marley Was Dead (2010), a comedy written by John Nicholson and Richard Katz and broadcast on BBC Radio 4. When a live broadcast of A Christmas Carol is interrupted by eggnog spilling onto the studio equipment, the skeletal team in the BBC's continuity department improvise their own production of the story with help from Jonathan Dimbleby, Dara Ó Briain, Jane Horrocks, Edward Kelsey, Charlotte Green and Peter Purves.
Scrooge Blues (2016) was written by Nicholas McInerny and broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in December 2002 and re-broadcast on BBC Radio 7 on 28 December 2010. This continuation, starring David Hargreaves, takes place one year after the events of A Christmas Carol after the transformation of Ebenezer Scrooge.
In Bleak Expectations, a Dickensian pastiche comedy series, the protagonist Philip 'Pip' Bin (played by Tom Allen) unsuccessfully attempts to become a novelist to raise himself out of poverty, one of his rejected attempts starting "How Ebenezer Scrooge hated Harvest Festival". Later, his arch-nemesis Gently Benevolent disguises himself as the Ghost of Harvest Festival Past to con Pip out of his fortune by imparting moral lessons via poorly workshopped theatrical performances passed off as visions.
In John Finnemore's Souvenir Programme, Finnemore's storyteller character tells the story of Christopher Mascheer, an employee at the Toy Crusher Corporation who plans to spend Christmas Day working rather than spending time with his family. After being shown his lonely future by the ghost of his childhood friend Rufus (a lion), Mascheer resolves to ignore his family completely to become Toy Crusher CEO sooner.
In The Museum of Everything, an audiovisual display ride details the life of Thomas Queasley, the worst-selling author in Victorian Britain whose works are clear plagiarisms of Charles Dickens's. One such example is An Easter Sing-song.


=== Derivative music adaptations ===
"Ebenezer Scrooge" (1953), a novelty song performed by Teresa Brewer based on the novella.
"Jacob Marley's Chains" (1993), a song by Aimee Mann inspired by the character of Jacob Marley. The song features on her album Whatever.
A Christmas Carol: Victorian Carols with Readings from Dickens (2009), an album released by The Gift of Music of Christmas carols performed by the Choir of Sidney Sussex College, accompanied by passages from the novella read by Sir Gabriel Horn.
"The Ghost of Christmas Past" (2016), a song by Elizabeth Chan using the Ghost of Christmas Past as an allegory for bereavement.
A Christmas Carol: A Folk Opera (2017), a concept album by folk band Green Matthews that retells the story by putting new lyrics to well-known carols and traditional tunes  A concert version of the album was toured around the UK the following year.
A Christmas Carol (2020), a concept album by metal band Majestica that retells the story using remixes of classic Christmas carols, such as "Tis the Season to Be Jolly", "Jingle Bells", and"Carol of the Bells".
"Ghost of Christmas Past" (2020), a song performed by Brina Kay inspired by the character of the same name.


=== Derivative online productions ===
A Dark Shadows Christmas Carol (2021), a production of Campbell Playhouse's adaptation performed over Zoom by the cast of soap opera Dark Shadows.


=== Derivative literature ===


==== 1980s–1999 ====
God Bless Us Every One (Methuen, 1985) by Andrew Angus Dalrymple. Subtitled Being An Imagined Sequel to "A Christmas Carol" and featuring all the major characters of the original in 1843, the year of the original's publication (the original is dated as having occurred seven years earlier here), expanding upon the Cratchit children Tim and Belinda.
Tiny Tim Strikes Back, short story (by 'Chuck Dickens') in The Utterly Utterly Merry Comic Relief Christmas Book; Tiny Tim takes exception to his nickname.
"Whatever Became of Tiny Tim?" (1992) by John Mortimer (New York Times Book Review, ). In this short story, Tim grew up to be a successful businessman and gained a knighthood, but became even more heartless than Scrooge (beginning his career by embezzling funds from Scrooge's Christmas turkey fund, then buying Scrooge out and pensioning off his own father). After moving to North Africa, he is visited on Christmas night 1894 by the ghosts of Scrooge and Christmas Yet-to-Come who force him to see a horrible vision of the world in 1992.
Jacob Marley's Christmas Carol (1994), a book by Tom Mula focusing on Jacob Marley and his attempts to redeem Scrooge lest he face eternal torment.[86]
The Spirit of the Season (1998), by Don Flowers; Paralleling the visitations of the three "spirits" 20 years before, Scrooge prevails on a grown-up Tim Cratchit to help to him try to reconnect with and win freedom for Marley's Ghost. Later adapted by Flowers and Fred Walton as a musical, Ebenezer Ever After (see above in "Derivative theatre adaptations").
Timothy Cratchit's Christmas Carol, 1917 (1998) by Dale K. Powell. A sequel novel to the Charles Dickens classic (Dickens World, 1998). In this version, an elderly Tiny Tim is a wealthy immigrant living in America who experiences his own spiritual visitations on Christmas Eve.


==== 2000–2010 ====
Marley's Ghost, (2000), by Mark Hazard Osmun: The prequel to A Christmas Carol. A novel imagining the life and afterlife of Scrooge's partner, Jacob Marley and how Marley came to arrange Scrooge's chance at redemption.
The Trial of Ebenezer Scrooge (Ohio State University Press, 2001) by Bruce Bueno de Mesquita. A uniquely philosophical take on the Scrooge mythology set in the afterlife with Scrooge on trial to determine if he merits entry into Paradise.
Scrooge & Cratchit (2002) by Matt McHugh. Bob Cratchit is now Scrooge's partner in business as they both face the wrath of bankers as ruthless as Scrooge in his prime. Reprinted in 2007 as The Index-Journal holiday edition insert. In print and Kindle/iPhone/ebook formats.
Mr. Timothy (HarperCollins, 2003) by Louis Bayard. Here again is an adult Tiny Tim, only this time as a 23-year-old resident of a London brothel who becomes embroiled in a murder mystery. Mr. Timothy was included in The New York Times's list of Notable Fiction for 2003.
The Last Christmas of Ebenezer Scrooge: The Sequel to A Christmas Carol (Wildside Press, 2003) by Marvin Kaye. This sequel picks up where the original left off, with Scrooge trying to right an unresolved wrong. This version was also adapted for the stage (see above in "Theater").
The Haunting Refrain to Charles Dickens' "A Christmas Carol" (2004, revised 2007). This short novel details the lives of the original characters, plus a few new introductions, 21 years later. It is posted exclusively to the web at his time and is out of print from its original printing run.
Hanukkah, Shmanukkah!, (2005) book written by Esme Raji Codell and illustrated by LeUyen Pham, re-imagines the 'Carol' story as a Chanukkah tale, with a miserly factory owner ("Scroogemacher") being visited by the spirits of three rabbis, each representing a different era of Jewish history.
Marly's Ghost: A Remix of Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol (2005), a young adult novel written by David Levithan and illustrated by Brian Selznick
Starring Tracy Beaker (2006), a children's book by Jacqueline Wilson that revolves around Tracy's involvement in a school production of A Christmas Carol
Mr Men: A Christmas Carol by Adam Hargreaves (2007), a children's book in the Mr. Men series retelling the story with Mr. Mean in the Scrooge role.
I am Scrooge: A Zombie Story for Christmas (2009) is a novel by Adam Roberts dealing with the aftermath of Tiny Tim's parlous health. It turns out that the child was a harbinger of an infectious virus that threatens a zombie apocalypse, and it is left to Scrooge and the Ghosts of Christmas Past, Present and Future to rectify the matter.


==== 2011–2019 ====
An Amish Christmas Carol (Amish Christian Classic Series Book 1) (2012) by Sarah Price.
One Last Christmas Carol: The Saga of Scrooge Continues (2012) by T. J. Cloonan (Author), R. A. Cloonan (Photographer). Dicken's characters become involved in a Victorian era mystery.
Scrooge: The Year After (2012) is a sequel written by Judy La Salle taking place one year after the events of the original novel, following Scrooge's attempt to investigate the cause of his sister Fan's death. It is broken into volumes, and thus far, only the first volume of the sequel has been released.
What did Scrooge do next? A fascinating sequel to Charles Dickens's famous story 'A Christmas Carol' (2013) by Michael Allen. In his famous story 'A Christmas Carol', Charles Dickens introduced us to Ebenezer Scrooge – and anyone who is familiar with that story will surely have wondered whether Scrooge really did change his ways. So here's the answer.
A Kindle short story collection A Christmas Carol: The Death of Tiny Tim and Other Dark Stories by Joseph L. Calvarese was published in 2014. The title story is a murder mystery that suggests that Scrooge sent the prize turkey to the Cratchit family with ill intent.
A Christmas Carol (2013), a chapter book in the Geronimo Stilton book series retelling the story with anthropomorphic mice and rats.
Jacob T. Marley, a 2014 novel by William R. Bennett focusing on Jacob Marley, how he influenced Scrooge into becoming worse than he was, and his attempts to make amends posthumously.
"Scroogical" (2014), a modern retelling of the tale that begins with Jacob Marley making a bet with the Ghost of Christmas Present, who doubles as a broker for souls.
Tim Cratchit's Christmas Carol: The Sequel to the Celebrated Dickens Classic (2014) by Jim Piecuch. Tiny Tim is all grown up in this continuation of Charles Dickens's beloved holiday classic, and this time a certain ghost shows him the true meaning of Christmas cheer.
Changed by Christmas: The Sequel to Charles Dickens's A Christmas Carol (2015) by Elizabeth W. Watkins.
The Life and Times of Bob Cratchit: A Background Story to Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol (2015), by Dixie Distler a novel detailing how Bob Cratchit grew up and came to work at Scrooge and Marley's, how he got married, and other events before the story began.
A Christmas Carol II: The Rise of the Juggernauts (2016) by Nicholas Kaminsky. A fantasy tale in which Scrooge has died, and Tiny Tim has become a martial artist. Tiny Tim must battle a treacherous secret society and a mechanical army, called the Juggernauts.
The Three Scrooges (2016) by Jeff Lane. The three spirits return to visit Scrooge accompanied by two new spirits, Ebenezer himself from two different times in his life
Jacob – A Denouement in One Act (2017), a story set roughly 80 years after the original where Jacob Marley, having played all three ghosts with no idea if his visit was successful, learns of the positive effects he had on Scrooge and London as a whole that may free him of his chains.
Marley (2017), a serialised web novella focusing on Jacob Marley in the days before A Christmas Carol, primarily his life and how he came to redeem Ebenezer. It also shows the background of the three Ghosts and features action sequences as someone Marley knew in life, and spurned, steals the Ghost of Christmas Present's torch in an effort to permanently stop the dead visiting the living.
Tiny Tim and The Ghost of Ebenezer Scrooge: The sequel to A Christmas Carol (2017) by Norman Whaler. In this romantic sequel, Ebenezer Scrooge dies suddenly just days before Christmas. Tiny Tim, now a young man who lost his sweetheart, battles anger and lost faith. Scrooge's ghost returns to teach him a much needed lesson.
A Vegan Christmas Carol (2018), book written by S. E. Harrison, provides a full-text adaptation in which animal-based products have been replaced.
A Christmas Carol Sequel: "The Redemption of Jacob Marley" (2019) a Kindle book by Andrew Passehl. Scrooge decides to help the Ghost of Jacob Marley obtain his redemption.
A Fifth Visitor: Or How Scrooge Kept Christmas (2019) by John D. Payne. Five years after Scrooge's famous Christmas Eve, he is visited again by a new spirit.
Christmas Parcel: Sequel to Charles Dickens' Classic "A Christmas Carol" (2019) by Alydia Rackham. Ebenezer Scrooge is dead, and Timothy Cratchit has grown into a young man who is terrified of poverty, willing to forfeit Christmas to chase business ventures. Scrooge's ghost is determined not to allow Tim to follow in his footsteps.
Ebenezer's First Noel: A Prequel to The Christmas Carol (2019) by Philip Wik. In this retelling, Jacob sends Ebenezer back to his days when he was in love with Belle for one last chance for love and to save Marley from his ghostly torments. Pursued by the criminal Professor James Moriarty, Ebenezer and Belle and their children Catherine and Heathcliff spend much of their lives in mid-nineteenth century Australia. This novel combines characters and elements from Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, H.G. Wells and Dickens.
Marley: A Novel (2019) by Jon Clinch. The story of Jacob Marley, business partner to Ebenezer Scrooge, the man who will be both the making and the undoing of Scrooge.
Mary's Song: A Sequel to Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol (2019) by Dixie Distler, a follow-up to the author's 2015 novel "The Life and Times of Bob Cratchit" in which Scrooge must fight to save Christmas from dark forces.
The Society of Scrooge: The Further Trials and Triumphs of Scrooge and His Companions (2019) by Judy La Salle that continues the story the author began in the novel Scrooge: The Year After, which was published in 2012.


==== 2020–present ====
A Christmasaurus Carol (2023), an instalment in the Christmasaurus book series by Tom Fletcher. William and the Christmasaurus discover a magical copy of A Christmas Carol at a mysterious library. Ebenezer Scrooge escapes from the book and tries to humbug Christmas. So it's down to the Christmasaurus, William, Santa and all of the Christmasaurus gang to try and get Scrooge back into the copy of his book.
Ebenezer and Jacob: A Slightly Different Christmas Carol: Being a Festive Friendship Tale of Christmas (2024), an adaptation by self-published author Cat Defender. In this version, Marley is alive and has found a more fulfilling life during his time away from Scrooge's business.


== Video game adaptations ==
Mega Man Christmas Carol (2010) – In this Mega Man fangame, Mega Man gets his Christmas presents stolen by an evil Santa Claus. To get the presents back, Mega Man must fight four Robot Masters based on the four ghosts from A Christmas Carol.
Mega Man Christmas Carol 2 (2011) – The sequel to Mega Man Christmas Carol. Mega Man, Proto Man and Bass fight against five more Robot Masters based on A Christmas Carol characters.
Ebenezer and the Invisible World (2023) – A Metroidvania 2D platformer, the game takes place immediately after the events of the novella and focuses on Scrooge in his efforts to take down Caspar Malthus, a wealthy industrialist's heir who was similarly visited one year prior by the three spirits.


== Podcasts ==
Three Ghosts (2020), book and music by C.E. Simon, Lyrics by Liz Muller. THREE GHOSTS is an epic retelling of Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol, with a cast of over 40 people from all over the world. Released on 19 December 2020.
Scrooge: A Christmas Carol (2023), an audio drama written by Paul Cuschieri for Hope Media Group, and starring Sean Astin as Scrooge, Maxwell Caulfield as Marley, Ryan O'Quinn as Bob Cratchit, Lucy Punch as The Ghost of Christmas Past, Ben Barnes as The Ghost of Christmas Present, Juliet Mills as The Ghost of Christmas Future, Clive Standen as Fred, Bethany Joy Lenz as Elizabeth, and John Rhys-Davies as The Narrator.


== See also ==
List of Christmas films
List of ghost films


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Fred Guida, A Christmas Carol and Its Adaptations: Dickens's Story on Screen and Television, McFarland & Company, 2000. ISBN 0-7864-0738-7.