Famous Impostors is the last of four non-fiction books completed by Bram Stoker, the author of Dracula. It features numerous historical impostors and hoaxes.
The first edition was published by the Sturgis & Walton Company of New York in November 1910. The British edition was published by Sidgwick & Jackson of London, also dated 1910, but printed in the United States. Newspaper and magazine coverage implies that it was published in January 1911.


== Contents ==
Dashed (—) annotations are by Wikipedia.

Pretenders
Perkin Warbeck
The Hidden King — Sebastian of Portugal
Stephan Mali — Šćepan Mali
The False Dauphins
Princess Olive
Practitioners of Magic
Paracelsus
Cagliostro
Mesmer
The Wandering Jew
John Law
Witchcraft and Clairvoyance
Witches
Doctor Dee
La Voisin
Sir Edward Kelley
Mother Damnable - a brewer and owner of today's The World's End, Camden. Suspected witch after her death.
Matthew Hopkins
Arthur Orton (Tichborne claimant)
Women as Men
The Motive for Disguise
Hannah Snell
La Maupin
Mary East
Hoaxes, Etc.
Two London Hoaxes — includes the Berners Street hoax
The Cat Hoax — a scam to buy cats brought to a certain address
The Military Review — a false parade announced at 1812
The Toll-Gate — a practical joke played by Charles Mayne Young for not paying a toll
The Marriage Hoax — a marriage stopped by the false claim that the groom already had a wife and children
Buried Treasure — a false treasure unearthed by a victim and a swindler, which gives his share to the victim in exchange for something of value
Dean Swift's Hoax — an alleged letter written by a criminal about his accomplices and hideouts
Hoaxed Burglars — thieves steal a secure box containing lead
Bogus Sausages — sausages are discovered to be skins filled with bread
The Moon Hoax
Chevalier d'Eon — A French diplomat, spy and soldier of ambiguous gender identity. Stoker's inclusion of d'Éon is now regarded as offensive.
The Bisley Boy — A claim that Queen Elizabeth I of England was secretly a man


== References ==


== External links ==
Famous Impostors at Project Gutenberg
 Famous Impostors public domain audiobook at LibriVox
Famous Impostors at BramStoker.org Full PDF version of Famous Impostors.