"Im schwarzen Walfisch zu Askalon" ("In the Black Whale of Ascalon") is a popular academic commercium song. It was known as a beer-drinking song in many German speaking ancient universities. Joseph Victor von Scheffel provided the lyrics under the title Altassyrisch (Old Assyrian) 1854, the melody is from 1783 or earlier.


== Content ==
The lyrics reflect an endorsement of the bacchanalian mayhem of student life, similar as in Gaudeamus igitur. The song describes, with some references to the Classics, an old Assyrian drinking binge of a man in an inn. The tables are made of marble and the large invoice is being provided in cuneiform on bricks. However the carouser has to admit that he left his money already in Nineveh. A Nubian house servant kicks him out then and the song closes with the notion, that (compare John 4:44) a prophet has no honor in his own country, if he doesn't pay cash for his consumption. Charles Godfrey Leland has translated the poems among other works of Scheffel. Each stanza begins with the verse "Im schwarzen Walfisch zu Askalon, but varies the outcome. The initial Im is often stretched for humorous effect. Some of the stanzas:

In the typical manner of Scheffel, it contains an anachronistic mixture of various times and eras, parodistic notions on current science, as e.g. Historical criticism and interpretations of the Book of Jonah as a mere shipwrecking narrative. There are various additional verses, including political parodies and verses mocking different sorts of fraternities.
The song has been used as name for traditional inns and restaurants, e.g. in Heidelberg and Bad Säckingen. In Bad Säckingen the name was used on several (consecutive) inns and for the still existing club "Walfisch Gesellschaft Säckingen" (Walfischia), honoring Scheffel.


== Mathematics International ==
There is exactly one verse for mathematics, called "International".

The same stanza is available in further 13 languages, including Greek (Μελαίνῃ τῇ ἐν Φαλαίνᾳ (Melaínē tē en phalaína – Black in the whale)) and Volapük, which are sung one after the other.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Manfred Fuhrmann: "Scheffels Erzählwerk: Bildungsbeflissenheit, Deutschtümelei", in Fuhrmann, Europas fremd gewordene Fundamente. Aktuelles zu Themen aus der Antike. Artemis und Winkler, Zürich 1995 ISBN 3-7608-1122-1
Udo Kindermann: "Der Dichter Scheffel, der Mineraloge Kobell und der Industrielle Zugmayer und Scheffels 'Petrefaktisch Lied'", in: Josef Victor von Scheffel zum 100. Todestag am 9. April 1986. Karlsruhe 1986, pp. 25–43
Heinz Linnerz: Das Trinklied in der deutschen Dichtung von Johann Hermann Schein bis Viktor von Scheffel (dissertation in philology). Cologne University 1952


== External links ==

Lyrics including a Latin version, ingeb.org
"Lyrics and melody", Catholic Studentenverband KStV Markomannia Münster
Audio on YouTube, Günter Wewel (bass)