Electra (Ancient Greek: Ἠλέκτρα, Ēlektra, also called The Electra), is a Greek tragedy by Sophocles. The original publication date is not known, but various stylistic similarities with the Philoctetes (409 BC) and the Oedipus at Colonus (406 BC) leads scholars to believe it was written towards the end of Sophocles' career. Richard Claverhouse Jebb dates it between 420 BC and 414 BC.


== Background ==
During the Trojan War, after King Agamemnon of Mycenae sacrifices his oldest daughter Iphigenia to the goddess Artemis in order to ensure favorable weather and winds when sailing for Troy after offending the goddess. When King Agamemnon returns from the Trojan War, his wife Clytemnestra and her lover Aegisthus (Agamemnon's cousin) kills him. Clytemnestra believes the murder was justified since Agamemnon had sacrificed their daughter  Electra, daughter of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra, rescued her younger brother Orestes from her mother by sending him to Strophius of Phocis.


== Plot ==

Set in the city of Mycenae a few years after the Trojan War, the play tells the story of Electra and her brother Orestes, who are haunted by the murder of their father Agamemnon by their mother Clytemnestra and their stepfather Aegisthus.The play begins years later when Orestes has returned as a grown man with a plot for revenge, as well as to claim the throne.
Orestes arrives with his friend Pylades, son of Strophius, and a pedagogue, i.e. tutor (an old attendant of Orestes, who took him from Electra to Strophius). They discuss a plan to get revenge for the death of Orestes father. They plan to have the tutor announce that Orestes has died in a chariot race and that two men (really Orestes and Pylades) are arriving shortly to deliver an urn with his remains. Meanwhile, Electra continues to publicly mourn the death of her father Agamemnon, holding her mother Clytemnestra responsible for his murder. During the time since she helped him escape, Electra has waited for Orestes to return to Mycenae. 
Electra's sister, Chrysothemis, enters and chides Electra for still holding resentment for their father's death for so long, saying they have no power to change what. has happened. Electra becomes angry at the that Chrysothemis is defending those who killed their father and favoring their mother. Chrysothemis then tells Electra that as soon as their step father returns from his visit to the countryside, if she continues to lament Agamemnon's death, she'll be imprisoned for life. Chrysothemis goes to leave to lay tributes on their father's grave, which she was ordered to do by Clytemnestra after she had a dream of Agamemnon haunting her. Electra convinces her to not do that on her mother's behalf, since to her their mother detested their father so greatly. 
Clytemnestra enters and begins trying to reason with Electra for her reasoning for killing Agamemnon. She tells her of his betrayal to the goddess Artemis as his reasoning, and that if he had killed her for any other reason he would have had to pay. Electra argues that whether justly or not, she killed him, which Electra cannot forgive her for. Immediately after, the tutor enters and informs Clytemnestra and Electra of Orestes "death". When Electra is told of the death of Orestes her grief becomes worse. Chrysothemis comes and tells Electra to be happy again because she say Orestes laying tributes on their fathers tomb, which Electra doesn't believe. She tells Chrysothemis of Orestes death. Chrysothemis leaves and Electra laments. 
Orestes arrives carrying the urn supposedly containing his ashes. He does not recognize Electra, nor does she recognize him. He gives her the urn and she delivers a moving lament over it, unaware that her brother is, in fact, standing alive next to her. He learns of Electra's anger of the death of their father, and over the death of Orestes, and she demands to take the urn containing his ashes. Orestes declines and reveals his identity to his sister. She is overjoyed that he is alive, but in their excitement, they nearly reveal his identity, and the tutor comes out from the palace to urge them on. Electra watches out for Aegisthus. Orestes and Pylades enter the house and slay Clytemnestra. As Aegisthus returns home, Electra keeps him briefly occupied talking about the messengers of Orestes death and leading Aegisthus to Clytemnestra's room. There, Orestes and Pylades put Clytemnestra's corpse under a sheet and then present it to Aegisthus as the body of Orestes. He lifts the veil to discover who it really is, and Orestes then reveals himself. They escort Aegisthus offset to be killed at the hearth, the same location where Agamemnon was slain. The play ends before the death of Aegisthus is announced, with the chorus telling the siblings they were successful in their mission and restored respect to their father's name. 


== Similar works ==
The story of Orestes' revenge was a popular subject in Greek tragedies.

There are surviving versions by all three of the great Athenian tragedians:
The Libation Bearers (458 BC), in the Oresteia trilogy by Aeschylus
Electra, a play by Euripides, probably in the early to mid 410s BC, likely before 413 BC, that tells a very different version of this same basic story from Sophocles.
This Euripides version includes a marriage for Electra, as well as a more involved role in the killing of their mother and stepfather.
The story was also told at the end of the lost epic poem Nostoi (also known as Returns or Returns of the Greeks).
The events are also brought up in Homer's Odyssey. Events preceding are brought up in the Iliad.


== Reception ==

Roman writer Cicero considered Electra to be a masterpiece, and the work is also viewed favorably among modern critics and scholars. In The Reader's Encyclopedia of World Drama, John Gassner and Edward Quinn argued that its "simple device of delaying the recognition between brother and sister produces a series of brilliant scenes which display Electra's heroic resolution under constant attack." Of the titular character, Edith Hall also wrote, "Sophocles certainly found an effective dramatic vehicle in this remarkable figure, driven by deprivation and cruelty into near-psychotic extremes of behavior; no other character in his extant dramas dominates the stage to such an extent." L.A. Post noted that the play was "unique among Greek tragedies for its emphasis on action."


== Commentaries ==
Davies, Gilbert Austin, 1908 (abridged from the larger edition of Richard Claverhouse Jebb)
Finglass, P. J., ed. (2007). Sophocles: Electra. Cambridge Classical Texts and Commentaries 44. Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86809-9.; Kovacs, David (August 3, 2009). "Review of Finglass (2007)". Bryn Mawr Classical Review.


== Translations ==
Edward Plumptre, 1878 – verse: (full text available at Wikisource)
Lewis Campbell, 1883 – verse
Richard C. Jebb, 1894 – prose (full text available at Wikisource)
Francis Storr, 1919 – verse (full text, with audio, available at Wikisource)
Francis Fergusson, 1938 – verse
E.F. Watling 1953 – prose
David Grene, 1957 – verse
H. D. F. Kitto, 1962 – verse
J. H. Kells, 1973 – verse (?)
Kenneth McLeish, 1979 – verse
Frank McGuinness, 1997 – verse
Henry Taylor, 1998 – verse
Anne Carson, 2001 – verse
Jenny March, 2001 – prose (acting edition)
Tom McGrath, 2003 – prose; full text
M. MacDonald and J. M. Walton, 2004 – verse
G. Theodoridis, 2006 – prose: full text
Eric Dugdale, 2008 – verse (acting edition)
Timberlake Wertenbaker, 2009
Nick Payne, 2011
Mary Lefkowitz, 2016 – verse
Ian C. Johnston, 2017 – verse: full text


== Adaptations ==
Elektra (play), a 1903 adaptation by Hugo von Hofmannsthal
Elektra, Op. 58, a 1909 one-act opera by Richard Strauss
Elektra: A Play by Ezra Pound and Rudd Fleming, written in 1949, published 1989 by Princeton University Press
Electra, an opera by Mikis Theodorakis (1995)
Elektra (2010 film), a 2010 Malayalam psychological drama film co-written and directed by Shyamaprasad
Elektra: a 2022 mythology novel by Jennifer Saint. It follows the story of Electra through 3 different women involved: Electra, Clytemnestra, and Cassandra.
Elektra, a 2025 adaptation/translation by poet Anne Carson, directed by Daniel Fish and starring Brie Larson. Staged at the Theatre Royal, Brighton (13 to 18 January 2025) and Duke of York's Theatre, London (24 January to 12 April 2025).


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Duncan, A. 2005. "Gendered Interpretations: Two Fourth-Century B.C.E. Performances of Sophocles' Electra." Helios 32.1: 55–79
Dunn, F. M., ed. 1996. Sophocles' Electra in Performance. Drama: Beiträge zum antiken Drama und seiner Rezeption 4. Stuttgart: M & P Verlag für Wissenschaft und Forschung.
Griffiths, E. M. 2012. "Electra". In Brill's Companion to Sophocles. Edited by A. Markantonatos, 73–91. Leiden, The Netherlands, and Boston: Brill.
Ierulli, M. 1993. "A Community of Women? The Protagonist and the Chorus in Sophocles' Electra." Métis 8:217–229.
Lloyd, M. 2005. Sophocles: Electra. London: Duckworth.
MacLeod, L. 2001. Dolos and Dike in Sophokles' Elektra. Mnemosyne supplement 219. Leiden, The Netherlands, Boston, and Cologne: Brill.
Marshall, C. W. 2006. "How to Write a Messenger Speech (Sophocles, Electra 680–763)." In Greek Drama III: Essays in honour of Kevin Lee. Edited by J. F. Davidson, F. Muecke, and P. Wilson, 203–221. Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies supplement 87. London: Institute of Classical Studies
Nooter, S. 2011. "Language, Lamentation, and Power in Sophocles' Electra". Classical World 104.4: 399–417.
Segal, C. P. 1966. "The Electra of Sophocles". Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association 97:473–545.
Sommerstein, A. H. 1997. "Alternative Scenarios in Sophocles' Electra". Prometheus 23:193–214.


== External links ==

 The full text of Electra at Wikisource (multiple English translations)
 Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Ἠλέκτρα
Electra at Standard Ebooks
Sophocles' Electra at Perseus Digital Library
 Electra public domain audiobook at LibriVox