Asrar-i-Khudi (Persian: اسرار خودی, The Secrets of the Self; published in Persian, 1915) was the first philosophical poetry book of Allama Iqbal. This book deals mainly with the individual, while his second book Rumuz-i-Bekhudi رموزِ بیخودی discusses the interaction between the individual and society.


== Introduction ==
It was published in 1915, Asrar-i-Khudi (Secrets of the Self) was the first poetry book of Iqbal. Considered by many to be Iqbal's best book of poetry, it is concerned with the philosophy of religion. In a letter to the poet Ghulam Qadir Girami (d.1345/1927), Iqbal wrote, "The ideas behind the verses had never been expressed before either in the East or in the West." R.A. Nicholson, who translated the Asrar as The Secrets of the Self, says it caught the attention of young Muslims as soon as it was printed. Iqbal wrote this in Persian because he felt the language was well-suited for the expression of these ideas.


== Overview ==
In the year 1915, he published his first collection of poetry, the Asrar-e-Khudi (Secrets of the Self) in Persian. The poems emphasise the spirit and self from a religious, spiritual perspective. Many critics have called this Iqbal's finest poetic work  
In Asrar-e-Khudi, Iqbal has explained his philosophy of "Khudi," or "Self." Iqbal' s use of term "Khudi" is synonymous with the word of "Rooh" as mentioned in the Quran. "Rooh" is that divine spark which is present in every human being and was present in Adam for which God ordered all of the angels to prostrate in front of Adam. 
However, one has to make a great journey of transformation to realise that divine spark which Iqbal calls "Khudi". A similitude of this journey could be understood by the relationship of fragrance and seed. Every seed has the potential for fragrance within it. But to reach its fragrance the seed must go through all the different changes and stages. First breaking out of its shell. Then breaking the ground to come into the light developing roots at the same time. Then fighting against the elements to develop leaves and flowers. Finally reaching its pinnacle by attaining the fragrance that was hidden within it. 
In the same way, to reach one's khudi or rooh one needs to go through multiple stages which Iqbal himself went through, spiritual path which he encourages others to travel. He notes that not all seeds reach the level of fragrance. Many die along the way, incomplete. In the same way, only few people could climb this Mount Everest of spirituality, most get consumed along the way by materialism. The same concept had been used by the medieval poet and philosopher Farid ud-Din Attar of Nishapur in his "Mantaq-ul-Tair" ("The Conference of the Birds").  
Iqbal proves by various means that the whole universe obeys the will of the "Self." He condemns self-destruction. For him, the aim of life is self-realisation and self-knowledge. He charts the stages through which the "Self" has to pass before finally arriving at its point of perfection, enabling the knower of the "Self" to become the vicegerent of God.


== Topics ==


== Editions ==
Nicholson, Reynold A. (tr. from original in Persian ) (1920). Secrets of the Self (Asrar-i khudi) – A philosophical poem by Sheikh Muhammad Iqbal. Macmillan & Co., London.


== See also ==
Index of Muhammad Iqbal–related articles
Javid Nama
Payam-i-Mashriq
Zabur-i-Ajam
Pas Chih Bayad Kard ay Aqwam-i-Sharq
Bang-e-Dara
Bal-e-Jibril
Rumuz-e-Bekhudi
Zarb-i-Kalim
Armaghan-i-Hijaz


== Notes ==


== External links ==

Read online
"Asrar-i-Khudi". Iqbal Academy Pakistan.
"Asrar-i-Khudi". Iqbal Cyber Library.
"The Secrets of the Self, English translation of Asrar-i-Khudi by Reynod Nicholson". Iqbal Academy Pakistan.
"The Secrets of the Self, English translation of Asrar-i-Khudi by Reynod Nicholson". Iqbal Cyber Library.
Muhammad Iqbal
Related Websites
Official Website of Allama Iqbal Archived 21 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine
Iqbal Cyber Library, Online Library
The collection of Urdu poems: Columbia University
Encyclopedia Britannica.
Allama Iqbal Urdu Poetry Collection
Allama Iqbal Searchable Books (iqbal.wiki)
Works by The Secrets of the Self at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Allama Iqbal at the Internet Archive
E-Books of Allama Iqbal on Rekhta
Social Media Pages
Facebook Page of Allama Iqbal
Twitter Account of Allama Iqbal
YouTube Channel
YouTube Channel of Allama Iqbal