Partial Portraits is a book of literary criticism by Henry James published in 1888. The book collected essays that James had written over the preceding decade, mostly on English and American writers, but also on the works of Alphonse Daudet, Guy de Maupassant and Ivan Turgenev. Perhaps the most important essay was The Art of Fiction, James' argument for the widest possible freedom in content and technique in narrative fiction.


== Summary and themes ==
In his essay “The Art of Fiction”, Henry James suggests that, “the story and the novel, the idea and the form, are the needle and thread, and I never heard of a guild of tailors who recommended the use of the thread without the needle or the needle without the thread.” The essay The Art of Fiction was written in response to an article by English critic Walter Besant that attempted to establish the "laws of fiction." For instance, Besant insisted that novelists should confine themselves to their own experience: "A young lady brought up in a quiet country village should avoid descriptions of garrison life." James argued that a sufficiently alert novelist could obtain knowledge from everywhere and use it to good purpose: "The young lady living in a village has only to be a damsel upon whom nothing is lost to make it quite unfair (as it seems to me) to declare to her that she shall have nothing to say about the military. Greater miracles have been seen than that, imagination assisting, she should speak the truth about some of these gentlemen."
James continually argues for the fullest freedom in the novelist's choice of subject and method of treatment: "The only obligation to which in advance we may hold a novel, without incurring the accusation of being arbitrary, is that it be interesting." In particular, James is suspicious of restraining fiction with specific moral guidelines: "No good novel will ever proceed from a superficial mind; that seems to me an axiom which, for the artist in fiction, will cover all needful moral ground."
James followed his own advice in criticizing the various writers included in Partial Portraits. In his essay on Maupassant, for instance, he wrote of the Frenchman's propensity for what James called the "monkeys' cage" view of human existence. But James from praisied Maupassant's vigour, precision and conciseness in describing life as he saw it.
Similarly, James praised the intellectual force of George Eliot, the stolid but comprehensive detail-work of Anthony Trollope, the unbounded imagination of Robert Louis Stevenson, and the genial common sense of Alphonse Daudet. All very different writers, but all speak with validity from their personal view on life. This wide range presages the "house of fiction" image James would include in the New York Edition preface to The Portrait of a Lady, where each novelist looks at life from a particular window of the house and thus composes a unique and personally characteristic account.


=== Table of contents ===


== Critical evaluation ==
Although later critics have often disagreed with James' particular judgments of individual writers or works, almost all acknowledge that James helped to make narrative fiction discussable as one of the fine arts. Partial Portraits contains some of James' most memorable and comprehensive essays on his fellow writers, and with grace and style he took their works seriously as artistic efforts of the first importance.
A personal note is the essay on Constance Fenimore Woolson, a woman who played an important if still uncertain role in James' life. This is the only essay in Partial Portraits on a writer of minor significance, and it has provided grist to the mill of biographical speculation.


== References ==

Henry James Literary Criticism - Essays on Literature, American Writers, English Writers edited by Leon Edel and Mark Wilson (New York: Library of America 1984) ISBN 0-940450-22-4
Henry James Literary Criticism - French Writers, Other European Writers, The Prefaces to the New York Edition edited by Leon Edel and Mark Wilson (New York: Library of America 1984) ISBN 0-940450-23-2


== External links ==
"George Eliot's Life" (reprinted as The Life of George Eliot). The Atlantic Monthly. 55: 668-678 (May 1885).
"Daniel Deronda: A Conversation". The Atlantic Monthly. 38: 684-694 (December 1876).
"Alphonse Daudet". The Century Magazine. 26(4): 385-395 (July 1883).
"Anthony Trollope". The Century Magazine. 26(4): 498-509 (July 1883).
"Du Maurier and London Society". The Century Magazine. 26(4): 49-65 (May 1883).
Original magazine publication of the essay Robert Louis Stevenson (1888)
Original magazine publication of the essay Ivan Turgénieff (1884)
"The Art of Fiction". Longman's Magazine. 4: 502-521 (September 1884).
Note on the text of Partial Portraits at the Library of America web site
 Partial Portraits public domain audiobook at LibriVox