The Shikshapatri (Gujarati: શિક્ષાપત્રી, Devanagari: शिक्षापत्री) is a religious text consisting of 212 verses, written in Sanskrit by Swaminarayan in 1826. It is one of the primary scriptures of the Swaminarayan Sampradaya and provides a framework for moral, social, and spiritual integration of society. The Shikshapatri contains instructions on various aspects of life, including devotion to God, righteous living, health, hygiene, etiquette, and religious duties for devotees of all stages and walks of life.
Completed on February 11, 1826 (Maha sud 5, Samvat year 1882) at Vadtal, the Shikshapatri was presented by Swaminarayan to Sir John Malcolm, Governor of Bombay, during a meeting on February 26, 1830. This historic copy, scribed by Nilkanthanand Muni in 1830, is currently preserved in the Bodleian Library at Oxford University. This manuscript contains additional material, including hymns by Dinanath, Shatanand, and Muktanand Muni, making it one of the oldest and most significant copies of the text.
The Shikshapatri has been translated into 29 languages, including various Indian languages and international ones such as English, French, and Chinese. The first English translation was published by Professor Monier-Williams, Boden Professor of Sanskrit at Oxford University.


== History ==
The Shikshapatri was written by Swaminarayan and completed on February 11, 1826 (Maha sud 5, Samvat year 1882) at Vadtal. It was composed as a response to the observed decline in morality and social harmony, distilling Swaminarayan's years of experience in improving societal conditions.


=== Meeting with Governor Sir John Malcolm ===

On February 26, 1830, a historic meeting took place at Rajkot between Swaminarayan and Sir John Malcolm, the then Governor of Bombay. This meeting was arranged by David Anderson Blane, the acting political agent at Rajkot, who had informed Governor Malcolm about Swaminarayan's positive influence on the people.
At this meeting, Swaminarayan presented a copy of the Shikshapatri to Sir John Malcolm. This copy, scribed by Nilkanthanand Muni in 1830, is now housed at the Bodleian Library of the University of Oxford.
This manuscript is one of the oldest copies of the text preserved. It contains additional material, First is an eight-verse hymn to Shri Narayan by Dinanath, followed by an eight-verse hymn to Shri Radha Krishna by Shatanand. At the end of the Shikshapatri is a Gujarati hymn by Muktanand Muni.


== Content and teachings ==
The Shikshapatri consists of 212 Sanskrit verses providing a comprehensive guide for moral, social, and spiritual living. It contains instructions on various aspects of life, including devotion to God, righteous living, health, hygiene, etiquette, and religious duties for devotees of all stages and walks of life.
The Gazetteer of the Bombay Presidency summarised the teachings of the Shikshapatri as:

The book of precepts strictly prohibits the destruction of animal life; promiscuous intercourse with the other sex; use of animal food and intoxicant liquors and drugs on any occasion, suicide, theft and robbery; false accusation against a fellow man; blasphemy; company of atheists and heretics, and other practices which might counteract the effect of the founder's teaching. It also states you are strictly forbiden to consume onion, garlic and hing (an indian spice used to cook indian food). 

Swaminarayan instructed his followers to read the Shikshapatri daily to remain constantly aware of their duties.


== Translations ==
Swaminarayan instructed Nityanand Swami to translate Shikshapatri from Sanskrit into Gujarati. It has since been translated into 29 languages, including Bengali, Hindi, Marathi, Tamil, Telugu, Odia, Urdu, Vraj, Afrikaans, Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Modern Hebrew, North Sotho, Portuguese, Russian, South Sotho, Spanish, Swahili, Xhosa and Zulu. 
The first English translation was published by Professor Monier-Williams, Boden Professor of Sanskrit at Oxford University.


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Digital Shikshapatri Provides a wide variety of online resources which set the Shikshapatri in its historical, cultural and religious context - The oldest copy of the Shikshapatri in the world today is shown, in digital form.
MS. Ind. Inst. Sansk. 72 Images available in Digital Bodleian