"A Virtuoso's Collection" is a short story by American writer Nathaniel Hawthorne. It was first published in Boston Miscellany of Literature and Fashion, I (May 1842), 193-200, and later included as the final story in the compilation Mosses from an Old Manse. 
The story references a number of historical and mythical figures, items, beasts, books, etc. as part of a museum collection. Some scholars regard the real-life museum of the East India Marine Society in Salem, Massachusetts, as a model for Hawthorne's fictional museum. The narrator is led through the collection by the virtuoso himself who turns out to be the Wandering Jew.


== The collection ==
Opportunity, by the ancient sculptor Lysippus
The wolf that devoured Little Red Riding Hood
The she-wolf that suckled Romulus and Remus
Edmund Spenser's 'milk-white lamb' which Una led in The Faerie Queene
Alexander the Great's Bucephalus
Don Quixote's horse Rosinante
The donkey from William Wordsworth's Peter Bell: A Tale
The donkey from Book of Numbers chapter 22 that was beaten by Balaam
Argus, Ulysses' dog
Cerberus
The fox from Aesop's fable The Fox Who Lost Its Tail
Dr. Samuel Johnson's cat Hodge
The cat who saved Muhammad from a snake, or Muezza, the Prophet's pet.  Perhaps both cats are in the collection.
Thomas Gray's inspiration for the poem "Ode on the Death of a Favourite Cat Drowned in a Tub of Goldfishes".  The cat, Selima, belonged to Horace Walpole
Sir Walter Scott's cat Hinse
Puss in Boots
Bast, the Egyptian sun and war goddess, in her cat form
George Gordon Byron's pet bear
The Erymanthean Boar
St. George's Dragon. See Saint George and the Dragon
Python
The serpent which tempted Eve
The horns of the stag poached by Shakespeare
The shell of the tortoise that supposedly killed Aeschylus
Apis, an Egyptian bull-deity
"The cow with the crumpled horn" from the nursery rhyme "This Is The House That Jack Built"
The cow that jumped over the Moon from the nursery rhyme "Hey Diddle Diddle"
A griffin
The dove that brought the olive branch to Noah to signify that the flood was receding
Grip, the raven that belonged to Barnaby Rudge and later inspired Edgar Allan Poe's "The Raven"
The raven in which the soul of George I of Great Britain revisited his love, Melusine von der Schulenburg, Duchess of Kendal after his death
Minerva's owl
The vulture (or eagle) that daily ate Prometheus's liver
The sacred ibis of Egypt
One of the Stymphalian birds shot by Hercules. See Labours of Hercules
Percy Bysshe Shelley's skylark from "To a Skylark"
William Cullen Bryant's water-fowl from "To a Waterfowl"
A pigeon, preserved by Nathaniel Parker Willis, from the belfry of Old South Church in Boston
The albatross from Samuel Taylor Coleridge's The Rime of the Ancient Mariner
A domestic goose from the temple of Juno on the Capitoline Hill.  Livy claimed these geese saved Rome from the Gauls around 390 BC.
Robinson Crusoe's parrot
A live phoenix
A footless bird of paradise or Huma bird
The peacock that once contained the soul of Pythagoras


== Editions ==
Nathaniel Hawthorne (May 1842). "A Virtuoso's Collection". Boston Miscellany. 1. hdl:2027/nyp.33433081753711.


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Goluboff, Benjamin (1995). "'A Virtuoso's Collection': Hawthorne, History, and the Wandering Jew".  Nathaniel Hawthorne Review 1995 Spring; 21 (1): 14-25. ISSN 0890-4197.
McMurray, Price (2002). "'I Would Write on the Lintels of the Door-Post, Whim': History and Idealism in 'A Virtuoso's Collection'. Conference of College Teachers of English Studies. 2002 September; 67: 32-42. ISSN 0092-8151.